---
book: "The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power"
author: "Shoshana Zuboff"
chapter: "Acknowledgments"
source_pages: "PDF pp. 327–329"
type: source
---

# Acknowledgments

The two people who contributed the most to this work at the beginning no longer stand beside me, that I might shower them with gratitude at the end. When a lightning fire destroyed our home in 2009, thousands of books along with every trace of my scholarly career and new work in progress vanished in a few hours. I thought that I would never write again, but my brilliant and beloved husband, Jim Maxmin, insisted that time would bring rebirth. It did. For nearly thirty years, Jim was my first, last, and most important reader and interlocutor. He patiently absorbed early drafts of these chapters, as we excitedly argued our way through the new ideas. It remains incredible to me that we cannot share the fruit of this long labor. Jim’s great love and boundless enthusiasm fortified me for the long road, in work and life. His spirit lives through these pages in ways too numerous to reckon.

Frank Schirrmacher, Germany’s courageous public intellectual and a publisher of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, was an extraordinary source of support and inspiration as I began to piece together my theories of surveillance capitalism and instrumentarian power. Frank urged me to write for FAZ while I pursued the longer work, insisting on publishing essays that, in my monkish way, I would have incubated for many more months or years. I learned so much from our endless discussions, and it is because of Frank that my work on Big Other and surveillance capitalism became useful public frameworks long before this book was finalized. Though he left us four years ago, I still reach for my phone to share a new thought with him. Frank! I am also grateful to current and former colleagues at FAZ, especially Edo Reents and Jordan Mejias who helped bring my essays there to fruition.

My deepest gratitude goes to the technology and data science professionals who gave so generously of their time, knowledge, and reflections over several years of interviews, as I pieced together my understanding of surveillance capitalism, its mechanisms and imperatives. I would gladly thank each one of these insightful talented teachers by name, but for my promises of confidentiality and anonymity. I also owe a debt of thanks to the families in the UK and Spain whom I interviewed during the worst years of the Great Recession. They taught me so much about “the collision” and how it set the stage upon which surveillance capitalism flourished. Special thanks to the “Montes” family, featured in Chapter 2, and to “David,” the attorney featured in the Pokémon Go narrative, for allowing me to elaborate their stories, though their names and details have been changed to protect their anonymity.

Several colleagues made invaluable contributions to this work, each one exemplifying the big-hearted selflessness of true scholarship when we gather in the service of ideas. I shall never forget these gifts. Privacy advocate Marc Rotenberg has been an extraordinary colleague who read and commented on several drafts and helped me hone my understanding of key themes as they bear on privacy law. Berkeley legal scholar Chris Jay Hoofnagle graciously read a version of the manuscript in its entirety at a crucial stage. His generous comments made an important contribution to this work. The erudite Frank Pasquale read parts of the manuscript at an early stage, offering sage advice, insights, and enthusiasm. David Lidsky brought his immense editorial talents to an earlier draft of the manuscript. His collegiality, conceptual grasp, and unparalleled mastery of craft helped me to discover the final structure of this work. My deepest thanks also go to several other colleagues who read drafts of individual chapters at various junctures during the last five years and shared their discerning comments: Paul Schwartz, Artemi Rallo, Mikkel Flyverbom, David Lyon, Martha Poon, Mathias Doepfner, Karyn Allen, and Peter van den Heuvel. Both Chris Soghian and Bruce Schneier tolerated my questions on encryption and data processing as I worked out my understanding of the foundational mechanisms of surveillance capitalism.

Thinking and writing are solitary projects, and I am thankful to colleagues who offered opportunities to share ideas with scholars and students. Jonathan Zittrain invited my participation as a Faculty Associate at the Harvard Law School’s Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society at an important time in the development of my thinking. David Lyon and David Murakami Wood hosted me at Queens University toward the end of this project, where discussions with faculty, graduate students, and undergraduates energized the final stages of writing. Special thanks go to Queens undergraduates Helen Kosc and Qianli Chen for their insightful comments. There were many other wonderful invitations that I forfeited to my obligation to these pages, and I remain deeply appreciative of my colleagues around the world who voiced their interest in this work. Though they could not know it, their enthusiasm kept me going.

Thanks to Leslie Willcocks at the London School of Economics and Chris Sauer at Oxford for their early intellectual support. As co-editors of a special issue of the Journal of Information Technology devoted to the theme of “big data,” they enthusiastically embraced my first academic paper on surveillance capitalism, “Big Other: Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information Civilization,” and helped speed its way to publication. Special thanks to the Senior Scholars of the International Conference on Information Systems for their recognition of “Big Other” with the ICIS’s 2016 Best Paper Award, which also fortified my commitment to this larger work.

My literary agent Wayne Kabak resonated with this project from the start and has been tireless in his encouragement and support. I treasure his friendship and wise counsel. My editor John Mahaney has been a passionate advocate of this undertaking, bringing his years of editorial wisdom to every draft and keeping me focused on the road ahead. Thanks to Kristina Fazzalaro, Jaime Leifer, Collin Tracy, Stephanie Summerhays, and the entire PublicAffairs team for their enduring commitment and support.

My ambitions for this book could not have been fulfilled without my cherished home team. My citations manager, William Dickie, joined me in 2014, when he couldn’t have had any idea of what he was getting into. Instead of running away as the project grew, he rolled up his sleeves and learned to master the citations process with a determination that evolved into mastery. I am so grateful for his patient spirit, kind heart, thoughtful contributions, and friendship as he quietly and diligently pursued his responsibilities. My research assistant Jordan Keenan joined this project in early 2015 and hit the ground running with outstanding contributions as he mastered the professional art of the research deep dive. I have relied on him through the twists and turns of this intellectual journey, and I watched him rise to each new challenge with grace and gusto as he trained his lively intelligence on new research territories. As if that were not enough, his unflappable good cheer, laid-back humor, and quiet sensitivity have made him an invaluable companion on this adventure.

My children selflessly supported my work on this book for these many years. They listened to my ideas, nurtured me through my frustrations, and celebrated my successes with so much love, patience, and devotion. When forks in the road required urgent decisions, they gathered round to help. My daughter Chloe Maxmin has been a steadfast and wise counselor, reading each draft of each chapter and offering the kind of unvarnished incisive commentary that all writers need but few receive. I learned that chapters were complete only when Chloe signed off on them. My son, Jake Maxmin, endured this book project throughout his college and now graduate school careers. Jake has been a fierce advocate, showering me with texts and phone calls, “You’ve got this mama,” whenever I faced a difficult stretch or deadline and stepping in to provide crucial help with final edits. Chloe and Jake’s astute advice and inspiration never failed to get me over the mountain. Thank you mis vidas, mis corazones. I would not be here without you.

I offer loving thanks to my friends who shared holidays and celebrations when I was lost to writing and every table, chair, and floor was covered with research materials: Minda Gold, Jacques Vesery, Isaac Vesery, Jonah Vesery, Lisa Katz, Ed, Theo, and Toby Seidel, Mary Dee Choate Grant, Garret Grant, Kathy Leeman, Kerry Altiero. Kathy Leeman read the book in its entirety before I began final revisions. Her perceptiveness and fervor were immensely helpful during the last year of writing. Virginia Alicia Hasenbalg-Corabianu cheered me on from Paris (“please finish this book already!”), hosted my children, and heroically translated one of my published lectures on surveillance capitalism into French. Susan Tross was an unconditional wellspring of love and support. My friend and “adopted son” Canyon Woodward has been a faithful cheerleader, always galvanizing my spirit and my stories. Finally, these declarations of acknowledgment are not complete without mention of Pachi Maxmin, my stalwart loving companion.

Every author acknowledges what I am about to write, because it is true: In the end, one faces the page in solitude. Anything in this book that falls short of the trust invested in me is my responsibility alone.
