---
book: "The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence"
author: "Ray Kurzweil"
part: "1999"
type: source
---

# 1999

The digitization of information in all of its forms will probably be known as the most fascinating development of the

twentieth century.

—An Wang

Economics, sociology, geopolitics, art, religion all provide powerful tools that have sufficed for centuries to explain

the essential surfaces of life. To many observers, there seems nothing truly new under the sun—no need for a deep

understanding of man's new tools—no requirement to descend into the microcosm of modern electronics in order to

comprehend the world. The world is all too much with us.

—George Gilder

If all the computers in 1960 stopped functioning, few people would have noticed. A few thousand scientists would have seen a delay in getting printouts from their last submission of data on punch cards. Some business reports would have been held up. Nothing to worry about.

Circa 1999 is another matter. If all computers stopped functioning, society would grind to a halt. First of all, electric power distribution would fail. Even if electrical power continued (which it wouldn't), virtually everything would still break down. Most motorized vehicles have embedded microprocessors, only cars that would run would be quite old. There would be almost no functioning trucks, buses, railroads, subways, or airplanes. There would be no electronic communication: Telephones, radio, television, fax machines, pagers, e-mail, and of course the Web would all cease functioning. You wouldn't get your paycheck. You couldn't cash it if you did. You wouldn't be able to get your money out of your bank. Business and government would operate at only the most primitive level. And if all the data in all the computers vanished, then we'd really be in trouble.

There has been substantial concern with Y2K (Year 2000 Problem), that at least some computer processes will be disrupted as we approach the year 2000. Y2K primarily concerns software developed one or more decades ago in which date fields used only two digits, which will cause these programs to behave erratically when the year becomes "00." I am more sanguine than some about this particular issue. Y2K is causing the urgent rewriting of old business programs that needed to be dusted off and redesigned anyway. There will be some disruptions (and a lot of litigation), but in my view Y2K is unlikely to cause the massive economic problems that are feared. [1]

In less than forty years, we have gone from manual methods of controlling our lives and civilization to becoming totally dependent on the continued operation of our computers. Many people are comforted by the fact that we still have our hand on the "plug," that we can turn our computers off if they get too uppity. In actuality, it's the computers that have their figurative hands on our plug. (Give them a couple more decades and their hands won't be so figurative.)

There is little concern about this today—computers circa 1999 are dependable, docile, and dumb. The dependability (albeit not perfect) is likely to remain. The dumbness will not. It will be the humans, at least the nonupdated ones, who will seem dumb several decades from now. The docility will not remain, either.

For a rapidly increasing array of specific tasks the intelligence of contemporary computers appears impressive, even formidable, but machines today remain narrow-minded and brittle. In contrast, we humans have softer landings when we wander outside our own narrow areas of expertise. Unlike Deep Blue, Gary Kasparov is not incompetent in matters outside of chess.

Computers are rapidly moving into increasingly diverse realms. I could fill a dozen books with examples of the intellectual prowess of computers circa end of the twentieth century, but I have only a contract for one, so let's take a look at a few artful examples.

THE CREATIVE MACHINE

At a time like ours, in which mechanical skill has attained unsuspected perfection, the most famous works may be

heard as easily as one may drink a glass of beer and it only costs ten centimes, like the automatic weighing machines.

Should we not fear this domestication of sound, this magic that anyone can bring from a disk at will? Will it not

bring to waste the mysterious force of an art which one might have thought indestructible?

—Claude Debussy Collaboration with machines!

What is the difference between manipulation of the machine and collaboration with it? . . . Suddenly, a window

would open into a vast field of possibilities; the time limits would vanish, and the machines would seem to become

humanized components of the interactive network now consisting of oneself and the machine still obedient but full of

suggestions of the master controls of the imagination.

—Vladimir Ussachevsky

Somebody was saying to Picasso that he ought to make pictures of things the way they are—objective pictures. He

mumbled he wasn't quite sure what that would be. The person who was bullying him produced a photograph of his

wife from his wallet and said, "There, you see, that is a picture of how she really is." Picasso looked at it and said,

"She is rather small, isn't she? And flat?"

—Gregory Bateson

The age of the cybernetic artist has begun, although it is at an early stage. As with human artists, you never know what these creative systems are going to do next. To date, however, none of them has cut off an ear or run naked through the streets. They don't yet have bodies to demonstrate that sort of creativity.

The strength of these systems is reflected by an often startling originality in a turn of a phrase, shape, or musical line. Their weakness has to do, again, with context, or the lack thereof. Since these creative computers are deficient in the real-world experience of their human counterparts, they often lose their train of thought and ramble off into incoherence. Perhaps the most successful in terms of maintaining thematic consistency throughout a work of art is Harold Cohen's robotic painter named Aaron, which I discuss below. The primary reason Aaron is so successful is the thoroughness of its extensive knowledge base, which Cohen has been building, rule by rule, for three decades.

Jamming with Your Computer

The frequent originality of these systems makes them great collaborators with human artists, and in this manner, computers have already had a transforming effect on the arts. This trend is furthest along in the musical arts. Music has always used the most advanced technologies available; the cabinet-making crafts of the eighteenth century; the metalworking industries of the nineteenth century; and the analog electronics of the 1960s. Today, virtually all commercial music—recordings, movie and television soundtracks—is created on computer music workstations, which synthesize and process the sounds, record and manipulate the note sequences, generate notation, even automatically generate rhythmic patterns, walking bass lines, and melodic progressions and variations.

Up until recently, instrument-playing technique was inextricably linked to the sounds created. If you wanted violin sounds, you had to play the violin. The playing techniques derived from the physical requirements of creating the sounds. Now that link has been broken, If you like flute-playing technique, or just happen to have learned it, you can now use an electronic wind controller that plays just like an acoustic flute yet creates the sounds not only of a variety of flutes, but also of virtually any other instrument, acoustic or electronic. There are now controllers that emulate the playing technique of most popular acoustic instruments, including piano, violin, guitar, drums, and a variety of wind instruments. Since we are no longer limited by the physics of creating sounds acoustically, a new generation of controllers is emerging that bears no resemblance to any conventional acoustic instruments, but instead attempts to optimize the human factors of creating music with our fingers, arms, feet, mouth, and head. All sounds can now be played polyphonically and can be layered (played simultaneously) and sequenced with one another. Also, it is no longer necessary to play music in real time—music can be performed at one speed and played back at

another, without changing the pitch or other characteristics of the notes. All sorts of age-old limitations have been overcome, allowing a teenager in her bedroom to sound like a symphony orchestra or rock band.

A Musical Turing Test

In 1997, Steve Larson, a University of Oregon music professor, arranged a musical variation of the Turing Test by having an audience attempt to determine which of three pieces of music had been written by a computer and which one of the three had been written two centuries ago by a human named Johann Sebastian Bach. Larson was only slightly insulted when the audience voted that his own piece was the computer composition, but he felt somewhat vindicated when the audience selected the piece written by a computer program named EMI (Experiments in Musical Intelligence) to be the authentic Bach composition. Douglas Hofstadter, a longtime observer of (and contributor to) the progression of machine intelligence, calls EMI, created by the composer David Cope, "the most thought- provoking project in artificial intelligence that I have ever come across." [2]

Perhaps even more successful is a program called Improvisor, written by Paul Hodgson, a British jazz saxophone player. Improvisor can emulate styles ranging from Bach to jazz greats Louis Armstrong and Charlie Parker. The program has attracted its own following. Hodgson himself says, "If I was new in town and heard someone playing like Improvisor, I'd be happy to join in." [3]

The weakness of today's computerized composition is, again, a weakness of context. "If I turn on three seconds of EMI and ask myself, "What was that?' I would say Bach," says Hofstadter. Longer passages are not always so successful. Often "it's like listening to random lines from a Keats sonnet. You wonder what was happening to Keats that day. Was he completely drunk?"

The Literary Machine

Here's a question for you: What kind of murderer has fiber?

The answer: A cereal killer.

I hasten to admit that I did not make up this pun myself. It was written by a computer program called JAPE (Joke Analysis and Production Engine), created by Kim Binsted. JAPE is the state of the art in the automatic writing of bad puns. Unlike EMI, JAPE did not pass a modified Turing Test when it was recently paired with human comedian Steve

### Martin. The audience preferred Martin. [4]

The literary arts lag behind the musical arts in the use of technology. This may have to do with the depth and complexity of even routine prose, a quality which Turing recognized when he based his Turing Test on the ability of humans to generate convincing written language. Computers are nonetheless of significant practical benefit to those of us who create written works. Of greatest impact is the simple word processor. Not an artificial technology per se, word processing was derived from the text editors developed during the 1960s at the AI labs at MIT and elsewhere.

This book certainly benefited from the availability of linguistic databases, spell checkers, online dictionaries, not to mention the vast research resources of the World Wide Web. Much of this book was dictated to my personal computer using a continuous speech-recognition program called Voice Xpress Plus from the dictation division of Lernout & Hauspie (formerly Kurzweil Applied Intelligence), which became available in the middle of my writing the book. With regard to automatic grammar and style checkers, I was forced to turn that particular Microsoft Word feature off, as it seemed to dislike most of my sentences. I'll leave the stylistic criticism of this book to my human readers (at least this time around).

A variety of programs help writers brainstorm. Paramind, for example, produces new ideas from your ideas," according to its own literature. [50] Other programs allow writers to track the complex histories, characterizations, and interactions of characters in such extended works of fiction as long novels, series of novels, and television drama series.

Programs that write completely original works are particularly challenging because human readers are keenly aware of the myriad syntactic and semantic requirements for sensible written language. Musicians, cybernetic or otherwise, can get away with a bit more inconsistency than authors.

With that in mind, consider the following:

A Story of Betrayal

Dave Striver loved the university. He loved its ivy-covered clock towers, its ancient and sturdy brick, and its sun- splashed verdant greens and eager youth. He also loved the fact that the university is free of the stark unforgiving trials of the business world—only this isn't a fact: Academia has its own tests, and some are as merciless as any in the marketplace. A prime example is the dissertation defense: To earn the Ph.D., to become a doctor, one must pass an oral examination on one's dissertation. This was a test Professor Edward Hart enjoyed giving.

Dave wanted desperately to be a doctor. But he needed the signatures of three people on the first page of his dissertation, the priceless inscriptions which, together, would certify that he had passed his defense. One of the signatures had to come from Professor Hart, and Hart had often said—to others and to himself—that he was honored to help Dave secure his well-earned dream.

Well before the defense, Striver gave Hart a penultimate copy of his thesis. Hart read it and told Dave that it was absolutely first-rate, and that he would gladly sign it at the defense. They even shook hands in Hart's book-lined office. Dave noticed that Hart's eyes were bright and trustful, and his bearing paternal.

At the defense, Dave thought that he eloquently summarized chapter 3 of his dissertation. There were two questions, one from Professor Rogers and one from Dr. Meteer; Dave answered both, apparently to everyone's satisfaction. There were no further objections.

Professor Rogers signed. He slid the tome to Meteer; she too signed, and then slid it in front of Hart. Hart didn't move.

"Ed?" Rogers said.

Hart still sat motionless. Dave felt slightly dizzy "Edward, are you going to sign?"

Later, Hart sat alone in his office, in his big leather chair, saddened by Dave's failure. He tried to think of ways he could help Dave achieve his dream.

Okay, that's the end. Admittedly the story kind of peters out, ending with a whimper rather than a bang. Seattle writer and editor Susan Mulcahy called the story "amateurish," criticizing the author's grammar and word choice. But Mulcahy was nonetheless surprised and impressed when she learned the author was a computer. The program that wrote the story, named BRUTUS.1, was created by Selmer Bringsjord, Dave Ferucci, and a team of software engineers at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Apparently, BRUTUS.1 is an expert on betrayal, a concept that Bringsjord and Ferucci spent eight years painstakingly teaching the computer. The researchers acknowledge that their program needs to learn about other issues besides betrayal. "Interestingness really combines all of the emotions," say Bringsjord and Ferucci, and that is something the cybernetic authors are not yet capable of achieving. [6]

The Cybernetic Poet

Another example of a computerized author is a computer program that I designed called Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet (RKCP). RKCP is a computer-generated poetry system, which uses language-modeling techniques to automatically generate completely original poetry based on poems that it has "read. [7]

RKCP reads a selection of poems by a particular author or authors (preferably an extensive selection) and then creates a "language model" of that author's work based on Markov models, a mathematical cousin of neural nets. RKCP can then write original poems from that model. As I discussed earlier, RKCP uses a recursive poetry- generation algorithm to achieve the language style, rhythm patterns, and poem structure of the original authors whose poems were analyzed. There are also algorithms to maintain thematic consistency through the poem. The poems are in a similar style to the author(s) originally analyzed but are completely original new poetry. The system even has rules to discourage itself from plagiarizing.

You can download a free copy of RKCP at www.kurzweiltech.com.

Following is a small sampling of poems written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after it had "read" poems by several famous poets, as well as, lesser-known contemporary poets.

Poems by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet

PAGE

A haiku written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Wendy Dennis

Sashay down the page

through the lioness

nestled in my soul.

IMAGINE NOW AND SING

A poem written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Wendy Dennis and Ray Kurzweil and love poems by various authors

Imagine now and sing,

creating myths

forming jewels from the falling snow.

SOUL

A haiku written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

John Keats and Wendy Dennis

You broke my soul

the juice of eternity,

the spirit of my lips.

I THINK I'LL CRASH

A poem written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Ray Kurzweil, Robert Frost, and Wendy Dennis

I think I'll crash.

Just for myself with God

peace on a curious sound

for myself in my heart?

And life is weeping

From a bleeding heart

of boughs bending

such paths of them,

of boughs bending

such paths of breeze

knows we've been there

THE STIFLING STUFFY

A haiku written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems

by Patricia Camarena Rose and Wendy Dennis

The stifling stuffy Catholic schoolroom, where I cannot be real.

WONDERED

A poem written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Dave Gitomer

today i wondered if i mused today i saw you i learned in awe and you if i mused today i had one wish if i saw you if i saw you if i had one wish

MOON CHILD

A haiku written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Kathleen Frances Wheeler

Crazy moon child Hide from your coffin To spite your doom.

ANGEL

A poem written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Patricia Camarena Rose and Sue Klapes Kelly

Beams of the dawn at the angel with a calm, silent sea with a hundred times we write, with a chance we can open up a steady rhythm in his face silent room desolate beach, Scattering remains of love.

TOMCAT

A haiku written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Randi and Kathryn Lynn

An old yellow tomcat

lies sleeping content,

he rumbles a heart

LONG YEARS HAVE PASSED

A poem written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Randi and Kathryn Lynn

Long years have passed.

I think of goodbye.

Locked tight in the night

I think of passion;

Drawn to for blue, the night

During the page

My shattered pieces of life

watching the joy

shattered pieces of love

My shattered pieces of love

gone stale.

SANDALS

A haiku written by Ray Kurzweil's Cybernetic Poet after reading poems by

Kimberly Mclauchlin and Ray Kurzweil

Scattered sandals

a call back to myself,

so hollow I would echo.

The Visual Arts

The visual arts lie in between the musical arts and literary arts in terms of the impact of computers. A great deal of visual art is created using paint and illustrator programs, which can simulate the effects of conventional materials such as paint strokes as well as implement a wide range of techniques that could only be executed on a computer. Recently, computers have also taken over most video and film editing.

The Web is filled with the artistic musings of cybernetic artists. A popular technique is the evolutionary algorithm, which allows the computer to evolve a picture by redoing it hundreds or thousands of times. Humans would find this approach difficult they would waste a lot of paint, for one thing. Mutator, the creation of sculptor William Latham and software engineer Stephen Todd at IBM in Winchester, England, uses the evolutionary approach, as does a program written by Karl Sims, an artist and scientist at Genetic Arts, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. [8]

Probably the leading practitioner of computer-generated visual art is Harold Cohen. His computerized robot named Aaron has been evolving and creating drawings and paintings for twenty years. These works of visual art are completely original, created entirely by the computer, and rendered with real paint. Cohen has spent more than three decades endowing his program with a knowledge of many aspects of the artistic process, including composition, drawing, perspective, and color, as well as a variety of styles. While Cohen wrote the program, the pictures created are nonetheless always a surprise to him.

Cohen is frequently asked who should be given credit for the results of his enterprise, which have been displayed in museums around the world. [9] Cohen is happy to take the credit, and Aaron has not been programmed to complain. Cohen boasts that he will be the first artist in history who will be able to have a posthumous exhibition of completely original works. [10]

Paintings by Aaron by Cohen These five original paintings were painted by Aaron, a computerized robot built and programmed by Harold Cohen. These color paintings are reproduced here in black and white. You can see the color versions on this book's web site, at www.penguinputnam.com/kurzweil. [11] Full-size versions of these, along with 11 more Aaron paintings, can be downloaded at http://www.kurzweilcyberart.com/aaron/static.html –ed.

PREDICTIONS OF THE PRESENT

With the impending millennium change there are no shortage of anticipations of what the next century will be like. Futurism has a long history, but not a particularly impressive one. One of the problems with predictions of the future is that by the time it's clear that they have had little resemblance to actual events, it's too late to get your money back.

Perhaps the problem is that we let just anyone make predictions. Maybe we should require futurism certification to be allowed to prognosticate. One of the requirements could be that in retrospect, at least half of your ten-or-more- year-ahead predictions have not been completely embarrassing. Such a certification program would be a slow process, however, and I suspect unconstitutional.

To see why futurism has such a spotty reputation, here is a small sample of predictions from some otherwise intelligent people:

"The telephone has too many shortcomings to be seriously considered as a means of communication."

—Western Union executive, 1876

"Heavier-than-air flying machines are not possible."

—Lord Kelvin, 1895

"The most important fundamental laws and facts of physical science have all been discovered, and these are now so

firmly established that the possibility of their ever being supplemented by new discoveries is exceedingly remote."

—Albert Abraham Michelson, 1903

"Airplanes have no military value."

—Professor Marshal Foch, 1912

"I think there is a world market for maybe five computers."

—IBM Chairman Thomas Watson, 1943

"Computers in the future may weigh no more than 1.5 tons."

—Popular Mechanics, 1949

"It would appear that we have reached the limits of what is possible to achieve with computer technology, although

one should be careful with such statements, as they tend to sound pretty silly in five years."

—John von Neumann, 1949

"There's no reason for individuals to have a computer in their home."

—Ken Olson, 1977

"640,000 bytes of memory ought to be enough for anybody."

—Bill Gates, 1981

"Long before the year 2000, the entire antiquated structure of college degrees, majors and credits will be a shambles."

—Alvin Toffler

"The Internet will catastrophically collapse in 1996."

—Robert Metcalfe (inventor of Ethernet), who, in 1997,

ate his words (literally) in front of an audience

Now I get to toot my own horn, and can share with you those predictions of mine that worked out particularly well. But in looking back at the many predictions I've made over the past twenty years, I will say that I haven't found any that I find particularly embarrassing (except, maybe, for a few early business plans).

The Age of Intelligent Machines, which I wrote in 1987 through 1988, as well as other articles and speeches I wrote in the late 1980s, contained a lot of my predictions about the 1990s, which included the following: [12]

- Prediction: A computer will defeat the human world chess champion around 1998, and we'll think less of
chess as a result.

What Happened: As I mentioned, this one was a year off. Sorry.

- Prediction: There will be a sustained decline in the value of commodities (that is, material resources) with
most new wealth being created in the knowledge content of products and services, leading to sustained

economic growth and prosperity.

What Happened: As predicted, everything is coming up roses (except, as also predicted, for long-term

investors in commodities, which are down 40 percent over the past decade). Even the approval ratings of

politicians from the president to the Congress are at an all-time high. But the strong economy has more to

do with the Bill in the west coast Washington than the Bill in the east coast Washington. Not that Mr. Gates

deserves primary credit, but the driving economic force in the world today is information, knowledge, and

related computer technologies. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan recently acknowledged that

today's unprecedented sustained prosperity and economic expansion is due to the increased efficiency

provided by information technology. But that's only half right. Greenspan ignores the fact that most of the

new wealth that is being created is itself comprised of information and knowledge—a trillion dollars in

Silicon Valley alone. Increased efficiency is only part of the story. The new wealth in the form of the market

capitalization of computer-related (primarily software) companies is real and substantial and is lifting all

boats.

- The U.S. House Subcommittee on Banking reported that in the eight-year period between 1989 and 1997, the
total value of U.S. real estate and durable goods increased only 33 percent, from $9.1 trillion to $12.1 trillion.

The value of bank deposits and credit market instruments increased only 27 percent, from $4.5 trillion to

$5.7 trillion. The value of equity shares, however, increased a staggering 239 percent, from $3.4 trillion to

$11.4 trillion! The primary engine of this increase is the rapidly increasing knowledge content of products

and services, as well as the increased efficiencies fostered by information technology. This is where new

wealth is being created.

Information and knowledge are not limited by the availability of material resources, and in accordance

with the Law of Accelerating Returns will continue to grow exponentially The Law of Accelerating Returns

includes financial returns. Thus a key implication of the law is continuing economic growth.

As this book is being written, there has been considerable attention on an economic crisis in Japan and

other countries in Asia. The United States has been pressing Japan to stimulate its economy with tax cuts

and government spending. Little attention is being paid, however, to the root cause of the crisis, which is

the state of the software industry in Asia, and the need for effective entrepreneurial institutions that

promote the creation of software and other forms of knowledge. These include venture and angel capital,

[13] widespread distribution of employee-stock options, and incentives that encourage and reward risk

taking. Although Asia has been moving in this direction, these new economic imperatives have grown more

rapidly than most observers expected (and their importance will continue to escalate in accordance with the

Law of Accelerating Returns).

- Prediction: A worldwide information network linking almost all organizations and tens of millions of
individuals will emerge (admittedly, not by the name World Wide Web)

What Happened: The Web emerged in 1994 and took off in 1995 through 1996. The Web is truly a worldwide

phenomenon, and products and services in the form of information swirl around the globe oblivious to

borders of any kind. A 1998 report by the U.S. Commerce Department credited the Internet as a key factor

in spurring economic growth and curbing inflation. It predicted that commerce on the Internet will surpass

$300 billion by 2000. Industry reports put the figure at around $1 trillion, when all business-to-business

transactions conducted over the Web are taken into consideration.

- Prediction: There will be a national movement to wire our classrooms.
What Happened: Most states (with the exception, unfortunately, of my own state of Massachusetts) have $50

to $100 million annual budgets to wire classrooms and install related computers and software. It is a

national priority to provide computer and Internet access to all students. Many teachers remain relatively

computer illiterate, but the kids are providing much of the needed expertise.

- Prediction: In warfare, there will be almost total reliance on digital imaging, pattern recognition, and other
software-based technologies. The side with the smarter machines will win. "A profound change in military strategy will arrive in the early 1990s. The more developed nations will increasingly rely on 'smart weapons,' which incorporate electronic copilots, pattern-recognition techniques, and advanced technologies for tracking, identification, and destruction." What Happened: Several years after I wrote the Age of Intelligent Machines, the Gulf War was the first to clearly establish this paradigm. Today, the United States has the most advanced computer-based weaponry and remains unchallenged in its status as a military superpower.

- Prediction: The vast majority of commercial music will be created on computer-based synthesizers.
What Happened: Most of the musical sounds you hear on television, in the movies, and in recordings are now created on digital synthesizers, along with computer-based sequencers and sound processors.

- Prediction: Reliable person identification, using pattern-recognition techniques applied to visual and speech
patterns, will replace locks and keys in many instances. What Happened: Person-identification technologies that use speech patterns and facial appearance have begun to be used today in check-cashing machines and to control entry into secure buildings and sites. [14]

- Prediction: With the advent of widespread electronic communication in the Soviet Union, uncontrollable
political forces will be unleashed. These will be "methods far more powerful than the copiers the authorities have traditionally banned." The authorities will be unable to control it. Totalitarian control of information will have been broken. What Happened: The attempted coup against Gorbachev in August 1991 was undone primarily by cellular telephones, fax machines, electronic mail, and other forms of widely distributed and previously unavailable electronic communication. Overall, decentralized communication contributed significantly to the crumbling of centralized totalitarian political and economic government control in the former Soviet Union.

- Prediction: Many documents never exist on paper because they incorporate information in the form of audio
and video pieces. What Happened: Web documents routinely include audio and video pieces, which can only exist in their web form.

- Prediction: Around the year 2000, chips with more than a billion components will emerge.
What Happened: We're right on schedule.

- Prediction: The technology for the "cybernetic chauffeur" (self-driving cars using special sensors in the
roads) will become available by the end of the 1990s with implementation on major highways feasible during the first decade of the twenty-first century. What Happened: Self-driving cars are being tested in Los Angeles, London, Tokyo, and other cities. There were extensive successful tests on Interstate 15 in southern California during 1997. City planners now realize that automated driving technologies will greatly expand the capacity of existing roads. Installing the requisite sensors on a highway costs only about $10,000 per mile, compared to $1 to $10 million per mile for building new highways. Automated highways and self-driving cars will also eliminate most accidents on these roads. The U.S. National Automated Highway System (NAHS) consortium is predicting implementation of these systems during the first decade of the twenty-first century.

- Prediction: Continuous speech recognition (CSR) with large vocabularies for specific tasks will emerge in the
early 1990s. What Happened: Whoops. Large-vocabulary domain-specific CSR did not emerge until around 1996. By late 1997 and early 1998, large-vocabulary CSR without a domain limitation for dictating written documents (like this book) was commercially introduced. [16]

- Prediction: The three technologies required for a translating telephone (where you speak and listen in one
language such as English, and your caller hears you and replies in another language such as German)— speaker-independent (not requiring training on a new speaker), continuous, large-vocabulary speech recognition; language translation; and speech synthesis—will each exist in sufficient quality for a first generation system by the late 1990s. Thus, we can expect "translating telephones with reasonable levels of performance for at least the more popular languages early in the first decade of the twenty-first century." What Happened: Effective, speaker-independent speech recognition, capable of handling continuous speech and a large vocabulary, has been introduced. Automatic language translation, which rapidly translates web sites from one language to another, is available directly from your web browser. Text-to-speech synthesis

for a wide variety of languages has been available for many years. All of these technologies run on personal

computers. At Lernout & Hauspie (which acquired my speech-recognition company, Kurzweil Applied

Intelligence, in 1997), we are putting together a technology demonstration of a translating telephone. We

expect such a system to be commercially available early in the first decade of the twenty-first century. [17]

MY LIFE WITH MACHINES: SOME HIGHLIGHTS

I walked onstage and played a composition on an old upright piano. Then came the yes-or-no questions. Former Miss America Bess Myerson was stumped. But film star Henry Morgan, the second celebrity panelist on this episode of I've Got a Secret, guessed my secret: The piece I had played had been composed by a computer that I had built and programmed. Later that year, I got to meet President Johnson with other high-school science winners.

In college, I ran a business matching up high-school kids with colleges using a computer program I had written. We had to pay $1,000 an hour to rent time on the only computer in Massachusetts with an extraordinary million bytes of core memory, which allowed us to fit all the information we had about the nation's three thousand colleges into memory at the same time. We received a lot of letters from kids who were delighted with the colleges that our program had suggested. A few parents, on the other hand, were furious that we had failed to recommend Harvard. It was my first experience with the ability of computers to affect people's lives. I sold that company to Harcourt, Brace & World, a New York publisher, and moved on to other ideas.

In 1974, computer programs that could recognize printed letters, called optical character recognition (OCR), were capable of handling only one or two specialized type styles. I founded Kurzweil Computer Products that year to develop the first OCR program that could recognize any style of print, which we succeeded in doing later that year. So the question then became, What is it good for? Like a lot of clever computer software, it was a solution in search of a problem.

I happened to sit next to a blind gentleman on a plane flight, and he explained to me that the only real handicap that he experienced was his inability to read ordinary printed material. It was clear that his visual disability imparted no real handicap in either communicating or traveling. So I had found the problem we were searching for—we could apply our "omni-font" (any font) OCR technology to overcome this principal handicap of blindness. We didn't have the ubiquitous scanners or text-to-speech synthesizers that we do today, so we had to create these technologies as well. By the end of 1975, we put together these three new technologies we had invented—omni-font OCR, CCD (Charge Coupled Device) flat-bed scanners, and text-to-speech synthesis to create the first print-to-speech reading machine for the blind. The Kurzweil Reading Machine (KRM) was able to read ordinary books, magazines, and other printed documents out loud so that a blind person could read anything he wanted.

We announced the KRM in January of 1976, and it seemed to strike a chord. All the evening network news programs carried the story, and Walter Cronkite used the machine to read aloud his signature sign-off, "And that's the way it was, January 13, 1976."

Shortly after the announcement, I was invited on the Today show, which was a little nerve-racking since we only had one working reading machine. Sure enough, the machine stopped working a couple of hours before I was scheduled to go on live national television. Our chief engineer frantically took the machine apart, scattering pieces of electronics and wires across the floor of the set. Frank Field, who was going to interview me, walked by and asked if everything was okay. "Sure, Frank," I replied. "We're just making a few last minute adjustments."

Our chief engineer put the reading machine back together, and still it didn't work. Finally, he used a time honored method of repairing delicate electronic equipment and slammed the reading machine against a table. From that moment, it worked just fine. Its live television debut then proceeded without a hitch.

Stevie Wonder heard about our appearance on the Today show, and decided to check out the story himself. Our receptionist was skeptical that the person on the other end of the line was really the legendary singer, but she put the call through to me, anyway. I invited him over, and he tried out the machine. He beseeched us to provide him with his own reading machine, so we turned the factory upside down to hurriedly finish up our first production unit (we didn't want to give him the prototype we used on the Today show, as it still had a few battle scars). We showed Stevie how to use it, and off he went in a taxi with his new reading

machine by his side.

We subsequently applied the scanning and omni-font OCR to commercial uses such as entering data into databases and into the emerging word-processing computers. New information services, such as Lexus (an online legal research service) and Nexus (a news service), were built using the Kurzweil Data Entry Machine to scan and recognize written documents.

In 1978, after years of scrambling to raise funds for our venture, we were fortunate in attracting interest and investment from a big company: Xerox. Most Xerox products transferred electronic information onto paper. They saw the Kurzweil scanning and OCR technology as providing a bridge back from the world of paper to the electronic world, so in 1980 they bought the company. You can still buy the OCR we originally developed, suitably updated—it's now called Xerox TextBridge, and continues as a market leader.

I kept up my relationship with Stevie Wonder, and on one of our get-togethers at his new Los Angeles recording studio in 1982, he lamented the state of affairs in the world of musical instruments. On the one hand, there was the world of acoustic instruments, such as the piano, violin, and guitar, which provided the rich complex sounds of choice for most musicians. While musically satisfying, these instruments suffered from a panoply of limitations. Most musicians could play only one or two different instruments. Even if you could play more than one, you couldn't play more than one at a time. Most instruments only produce one note at a time. There were very limited means available to shape the sounds.

On the other hand, there was the world of electronic instruments, in which these control limitations disappeared. In the computerized world, you could record one line of music on a sequencer, play it back, and record another sequence over it, building up a multi-instrumental composition line by line. You could edit wrong notes without replaying the entire sequence. You could layer multiple sounds, modify their sonic characteristics, play songs in nonreal time, and use a great variety of other techniques. There was only one problem. The sounds you had to work with in the electronic world sounded very thin, rather like an organ, or an electronically processed organ.

Wouldn't it be great, Stevie mused, if we could use the extraordinarily flexible computer-control methods on the beautiful sounds of acoustic instruments? I thought about it and it sounded quite doable, so that meeting constituted the founding of Kurzweil Music Systems, and defined its raison d'etre.

With Stevie Wonder as our musical adviser, we set out to combine these two worlds of music. In June of 1983, we demonstrated an engineering prototype of the Kurzweil 250 (K250) and introduced it commercially in 1984. The K250 is considered to be the first electronic musical instrument to successfully emulate the complex sound response of a grand piano and virtually all other orchestral instruments.

Earlier, my father, who was a noted musician, had played a role in developing my interest in electronic music. Before his death in 1970, he told me that he believed I would one day combine my interests in computers and in music, as he felt there was a natural affinity between the two. I remember that when my father wanted to hear one of his orchestral compositions, he had to engage an entire orchestra. This meant raising money, mimeographing copies of handwritten sheet music, selecting and hiring the right musicians and arranging a hall in which they could play. After all of that, he would get to hear his composition for the first time. God forbid if he didn't like the composition exactly the way it was, for then he would have to dismiss the musicians, spend days rewriting modified scores by hand, raise more money, rehire the musicians, and get them back together. Today a musician can hear her multi-instrumental composition on a Kurzweil or other synthesizer, make changes as easily as one would to a letter on a word processor, and hear the results instantly.

I sold Kurzweil Music Systems to a Korean company, Young Chang, the world's largest piano manufacturer, in 1990. Kurzweil Music Systems remains one of the leading brands of electronic musical instruments in the world and is sold in forty-five countries.

I also started Kurzweil Applied Intelligence in 1982 with the goal of creating a voice-activated word processor. This is a technology that is hungry for MIPS (that is, computer speed) and megabytes (that is, memory), so early systems limited the size of the vocabulary that users could employ. These early systems also required users to pause briefly between words. . . so. . . you. . . had. . . to. . . speak. . . like. . . this. We combined this "discrete word" speech-recognition technology with a medical knowledge base to create a system that enabled doctors to create their medical reports by simply talking to their computers. Our product, called Kurzweil Voicemed (now Kurzweil Clinical Reporter), actually guides the doctors, through the reporting process. We also introduced a general-purpose dictation product called Kurzweil Voice, which enabled users to create written documents by speaking one word at a time to their personal computer. This product became

particularly popular with people who have a disability in the use of their hands.

Just this year, courtesy of Moore's Law, personal computers became fast enough to recognize fully continuous speech, so I am able to dictate the rest of this book by talking to our latest product, called Voice Xpress Plus, at speeds around a hundred words per minute. Of course, I don't get a hundred words written every minute since I change my mind a lot, but Voice Xpress doesn't seem to mind.

We sold this company as well, to Lernout & Hauspie (L&H), a large speech-and-language technology company with headquarters in Belgium. Shortly after the acquisition by L&H in 1997, we arranged a strategic alliance between the dictation division of L&H (formerly Kurzweil Applied Intelligence) and Microsoft, so our speech technology is likely to be used by Microsoft in future products.

L&H is also the leader in text-to-speech synthesis and automatic language translation, so the company now has all the technologies needed for a translating telephone. As I mentioned above, we're now putting together a technology demonstration of a system that will allow you to speak in English with the person at the other end hearing you in German, and vice versa. Eventually, you'll be able to call anyone in the world and have what you say instantly translated into any popular language. Of course, our ability to misunderstand each other will remain unimpaired.

Another application of our speech-recognition technology, and one of our initial goals, is a listening device for the deaf, essentially the opposite of a reading machine for the blind. By recognizing natural continuous speech in real time, the device will enable a deaf person to read what people are saying, thereby overcoming the principal handicap associated with deafness.

In 1996, I founded a new reading-technology company called Kurzweil Educational Systems, which has developed a new generation of print-to-speech reading software for sighted persons with reading disabilities, as well as a new reading machine for blind people. The reading-disabilities version, called the Kurzweil 3000, scans a printed document, displays the page just as it appears in the original document (for example, book, magazine), with all of the color graphics and pictures intact. It then reads the document out loud while highlighting the image of the print as it is being read. It essentially does what a reading teacher does—reading to a pupil while pointing out exactly what is being read.

It is the applications of the technology benefiting disabled people that have brought me the greatest gratification. There is a fortuitous match between the capabilities of contemporary computers and the needs of a disabled person. We're not creating cybernetic geniuses today—not yet. The intelligence of our present-day intelligent computers is narrow, which can provide effective solutions for the narrow deficits of most disabled persons. The restricted intelligence of the machine works effectively with the broad and flexible intelligence of the disabled person. Overcoming the handicaps associated with disabilities using AI technologies has long been a personal goal of mine. With regard to the major physical and sensory disabilities, I believe that in a couple of decades we will come to herald the effective end of handicaps. As amplifiers of human thought, computers have great potential to assist human expression and to expand creativity for all of us. I hope to continue playing a role in harnessing this potential.

All of these projects have required the dedication and talents of many brilliant individuals in a broad range of fields. It is always exciting to see—or hear—a new product, and to see its impact on the lives of its users. A great pleasure has been sharing in the creative process, and its fruits, with these many outstanding men and women.

THE NEW LUDDITE CHALLENGE

First let us postulate that the computer scientists succeed in developing intelligent machines that can do all things

better than human beings can do them. In that case presumably all work will be done by vast, highly organized

systems of machines and no human effort will be necessary. Either of two cases might occur The machines might be

permitted to make all of their own decisions without human oversight, or else human control over the machines might

be retained.

If the machines are permitted to make all their own decisions, we can't make any conjectures as to the results,

because it is impossible to guess how such machines might behave. We only point out that the fate of the human race

would be at the mercy of the machines. It might be argued that the human race would never be foolish enough to hand

over all the power to the machines. But we are suggesting neither that the human race would voluntarily turn power

over to the machines nor that the machines would willfully seize power. What we do suggest is that the human race

might easily permit itself to drift into a position of such dependence on the machines that it would have no practical

choice but to accept all of the machines' decisions. As society and the problems that face it become more and more

complex and machines become more and more intelligent, people will let machines make more of their decisions for

them, simply because machine-made decisions will bring better results than man-made ones. Eventually a stage may

be reached at which the decisions necessary to keep the system running will be so complex that human beings will be

incapable of making them intelligently. At that stage the machines will be in effective control. People won't be able to

just turn the machines off, because they will be so dependent on them that turning them off would amount to suicide.

On the other hand it is possible that human control over the machines may be retained. in that case the average

man may have control over certain private machines of his own, such as his car or his personal computer but control

over large systems of machines will be in the hands of a tiny elite—just as it is today, but with two differences. Due

to improved techniques the elite will have greater control over the masses; and because human work will no longer be

necessary the masses will be superfluous, a useless burden on the system. If the elite is ruthless they may simply

decide to exterminate the mass of humanity. If they are humane they may use propaganda or other psychological or

biological techniques to reduce the birth rate until the mass of humanity becomes extinct, leaving the world to the

elite. Or, if the elite consists of soft-hearted liberals, they may decide to play the role of good shepherds to the rest of

the human race. They will see to it that everyone's physical needs are satisfied, that all children are raised under

psychologically hygienic conditions, that everyone has a wholesome hobby to keep him busy, and that anyone who

may become dissatisfied undergoes "treatment" to cure his "problem." Of course, life will be so purposeless that

people will have to be biologically or psychologically engineered either to remove their need for the power process or to

make them "sublimate" their drive for power into some harmless hobby. These engineered human beings may be

happy in such a society, but they most certainly will not be free. They will have been reduced to the status of domestic

animals.

—Theodore Kaczynski

The weavers of Nottingham enjoyed a modest but comfortable lifestyle from their thriving cottage industry of producing fine stockings and lace. This went on for hundreds of years, as their stable family businesses were passed down from generation to generation. But with the invention of the power loom and the other textile automation machines of the early eighteenth century, the weavers' livelihoods came to an abrupt end. Economic power passed from the weaving families to the owners of the machines.

Into this turmoil came a young and feebleminded boy named Ned Ludd, who, legend has it, broke two textile factory machines by accident as a result of sheer clumsiness. From that point on, whenever factory equipment was found to have been mysteriously damaged, anyone suspected of foul play would say, "But Ned Ludd did it."

In 1812, the desperate weavers formed a secret society, an urban guerrilla army They made threats and demands of factory owners, many of whom complied. When asked who their leader was, they replied, "Why, General Ned Ludd, of course." Although the Luddites, as they became known, initially directed most of their violence against the machines, a series of bloody engagements erupted later that year. The tolerance of the Tory government for the Luddites ended, and the movement dissolved with the imprisonment and hanging of prominent members. [18]

The ability of machines to displace human employment was not an intellectual exercise for the Luddites. They had seen their way of life turned on its head. It was little comfort to the weavers that new and more lucrative employment had been created to design, manufacture, and market the new machines. There were no government programs to retrain the weavers to become automation designers.

Although they failed to create a sustained and viable movement, the Luddites have remained a powerful symbol as machines have continued to displace human workers. As one of many examples of the effect of automation on employment, about a third of the U.S. population was involved in the production of agricultural products at the beginning of the twentieth century Today, that percentage is about 3 percent. [19] It would have been little comfort to the farmers of a hundred years ago to point out that their lost jobs would ultimately be compensated by new jobs in a future electronics industry, or that their descendants could become software designers in Silicon Valley.

The reality of lost jobs is often more compelling than the indirect promise of new jobs created in distant new industries. When advertising agencies started using Kurzweil synthesizers to create the sound tracks for television commercials rather than hire live musicians, the musicians' union was not happy about it. We pointed out that the new computer-music technology was actually beneficial to musicians because it made music more exciting. For

example, industrial films that had formerly used prerecorded orchestral music (because the limited budget of such films did not allow the hiring of an entire orchestra) were now using original music created by a musician with a synthesizer. As it turned out, this wasn't a very effective argument, since the synthesizer players tended not to be union members.

The Luddite philosophy remains very much alive as an ideological inclination, but as a political and economic movement, it remains just below the surface of contemporary debate. The public appears to understand that the creation of new technology is fueling the expansion of economic well-being. The statistics demonstrate quite clearly that automation is creating more and better jobs than it is eliminating. In 1870 only 12 million Americans, representing about one third of the civilian population, had jobs. By 1998, the figure rose to 126 million jobs held by about two thirds of the civilian population. The gross national product on a per capita basis and in constant 1958 dollars went from $530 in 1870 to at least ten times that today. [21] There has been a comparable change in the actual earning power of available jobs. This 1,000 percent increase in real wealth has resulted in a greatly improved standard of living, better health care and education, and a substantially improved ability to provide for those who need help in our society. At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution life expectancy in North America and northwestern Europe was about thirty-seven years. Now, two centuries later, it has doubled, and is continuing to increase.

The jobs created have also been on a higher level. Indeed, much of the additional employment has been in the area of providing the more intense education that today's jobs require. For example, we now spend ten times as much (in constant dollars) on a per capita basis for public school education as we did a century ago. In 1870 only 2 percent of American adults had a high-school diploma, whereas the figure is over 80 percent today. There were only 52,000 college students in 1870; there are 15 million today.

The process of automation that began in England two hundred years ago—and continues today at an ever accelerating pace (as per the Law of Accelerating Returns)—eliminates jobs at the bottom of the skill ladder and creates new ones at the top of the skill ladder. Hence increasing investment in education. But what happens when the skill ladder extends beyond the abilities of the bulk of the human population, and ultimately beyond the ability of any human, educational innovations notwithstanding? The answer we can predict from the Law of Accelerating Returns is that the ladder will nonetheless continue to reach ever higher, implying that humans will need to become more capable by other means. Education can only accomplish so much. The only way for the species to keep pace will be for humans to gain greater competence from the computational technology we have created, that is, for the species to merge with its technology.

Not everyone will find this prospect appealing, so the Luddite issue will broaden in the twenty-first century from an anxiety about human livelihoods to one concerning the essential nature of human beings. However, the Luddite movement is not likely to fare any better in the next century than it has in the past two. it suffers from the lack of a viable alternative agenda.

Ted Kaczynski, whom I quote above from his so-called "Unabomber Manifesto," entitled Industrial Society and Its Future, advocates a simple return to nature. [22] Kaczynski is not talking about a contemplative visit to a nineteenth- century Walden Pond, but about the species dropping all of its technology and reverting to a simpler time. Although he makes a compelling case for the dangers and damages that have accompanied industrialization his proposed vision is neither compelling nor feasible. After all, there is too little nature left to return to, and there are too many human beings. For better or worse, we're stuck with technology.

YOUR CYBERNETIC POET WRITES SOME INTERESTING LINES . . .

I'd be interested in your selections.

WELL, LOOKING AT THE FIRST FEW POEMS IN YOUR COLLECTION:

Sashay down the page . . .

through the lioness / nestled in my soul . . .

forming jewels from the falling snow . . .

the juice of eternity, / the spirit of my lips . . . BUT THE POEMS DON'T ALWAYS FULLY TRACK, IF YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN.

Yes, readers tolerate a little more discontinuity in verse than in prose. The fundamental problem is the inability of contemporary cybernetic artists to master the levels of context that human artists are capable of. It's not a permanent limitation, of course. Ultimately, we'll be the ones having difficulty keeping up with the depth of context that computer intelligence is capable of—

### WITHOUT SOME ASSIST—

From computer extensions to our intelligence, yes, exactly.

In the meantime, the Cybernetic Poet is good at being an inspirational assistant. While its poems don't always make it all the way through, it does have some real strength at finding unique turns of phrase. So the program has a mode called The Poet's Assistant. The human user writes a poem in a word-processing window. The Poet's Assistant watches her write and fills the rest of the screen with suggestions, such as, "Here's how Robert Frost would finish that line," or, "Here's a set of rhymes and/or alliterations that Keats used with that word," or, "Here's how Emily Dickinson would finish that poem," and so on. If provided with the human author's own poems, it can even suggest how the user herself would finish a line or poem. Every time you write another word, you get dozens of ideas. Not all of them make sense, but it's a good solution for writer's block. And you're welcome to steal its ideas.

NOW WITH REGARD TO COHEN'S PICTURES . . .

You mean Aaron's pictures . . .

OH, I GUESS I'M NOT SENSITIVE TO AARON'S FEELINGS—

### Since it doesn't have any—

NOT YET, RIGHT? BUT WHAT I WAS GOING TO SAY WAS THAT AARON'S PICTURES DO SEEM TO MAINTAIN THEIR CONTEXT. THE WHOLE THING KIND OF WORKS FOR ME.

Yes, Cohen's Aaron is probably the best example of a cybernetic visual artist today, and certainly one of the primary examples of computers in the arts. Cohen has programmed thousands of rules on all aspects of drawing and painting, from the artistic nature of painted people, plants, and objects to composition and color choice.

Keep in mind that Aaron does not seek to emulate other artists. It has its own set of styles, so it is feasible for its knowledge base to be relatively complete within its visual domain. Of course, human artists, even brilliant ones, also have a boundary to their domain. Aaron is quite respectable in the diversity of its art.

OKAY, JUST TO SWITCH TO SOMEONE MUCH LESS RESPECTABLE, YOU QUOTED TED KACZYNSKI TALKING ABOUT HOW THE HUMAN RACE MIGHT DRIFT INTO DEPENDENCE ON MACHINES, AND THEN WE'LL HAVE NO CHOICE BUT TO ACCEPT ALL MACHINE DECISIONS. BASED ON WHAT YOU SAID ABOUT THE IMPLICATIONS OF ALL THE COMPUTERS STOPPING, AREN'T WE ALREADY THERE?

We are certainly there with regard to the dependence, not yet with regard to the level of machine intelligence.

THAT QUOTE WAS SURPRISINGLY—

Coherent?

YES, THAT WAS THE WORD I WAS LOOKING FOR.

Kaczynski's whole manifesto is rather well written, not at all what you would expect given the popular portrait of him as a madman. As political science professor James Q. Wilson of the University of California wrote, "The language is clear, precise and calm. The argument is subtle and carefully developed, lacking anything even faintly resembling

the wild claims or irrational speculation that a lunatic might produce." And he has gathered quite a following among anarchists and antitechnologists on the Internet—

WHICH IS THE ULTIMATE IN TECHNOLOGY.

Yes, that irony has not been lost.

BUT WHY QUOTE KACZYNSKI? I MEAN, . . .

Well, his manifesto is as persuasive an exposition on the psychological alienation, social dislocation, environmental injury, and other injuries and perils of the technological age as any other . . .

THAT'S NOT MY POINT. I DOUBT THAT THE LUDDITES ARE HAPPY HAVING HIM AS A SYMBOL OF THEIR IDEAS. YOU'RE SORT OF DISCREDITING THEIR MOVEMENT BY USING HIM AS THEIR SPOKESPERSON.

Okay, that's a legitimate objection. I suppose I could defend my extensive quote as providing an important example of a relevant phenomenon, which is violent Ludditism. The movement started with violence, and the challenge to the human race posed by machines is fundamental enough that a violent reaction during this coming century is a strong possibility.

BUT YOUR USE OF THE QUOTATION SEEMED LIKE MORE THAN JUST AN EXAMPLE OF SOME FRINGE PHENOMENON.

Well, I was surprised how much of Kaczynski's manifesto I agreed with.

SUCH AS . . .

Oh, so now you're interested.

IT WAS KIND OF INTRIGUING, AND APROPOS TO THE OTHER THINGS YOU'VE BEEN TELLING ME.

Yes, I thought so. Kaczynski describes the benefits of technology, as well as its costs and dangers. He then makes this point:

A further reason why industrial society cannot be reformed in favor of freedom is that modern technology

is a unified system in which all parts are dependent on one another. You can't get rid of the "bad" parts of

technology and retain only the "good" parts. Take modern medicine, for example. Progress in medical

science depends on programs in chemistry, physics, biology, computer science, and other fields. Advanced

medical treatments require expensive, high-tech equipment that can be made available only by a

technologically progressive, economically rich society. Clearly you can't have much progress in medicine

without the whole technological system and everything that goes with it.

So far, so good. He then makes the basic judgment that the "bad parts" outweigh the "good parts." Not that this is a crazy position, either, but nonetheless, this is where we part company. Now it is not my view that the advance of technology is automatically beneficial. It is conceivable that humanity will ultimately regret its technological path. Although the risks are quite real, my fundamental belief is that the potential gains are worth the risk. But this is a belief; it's not a position I can easily demonstrate.

I'D BE INTERESTED IN YOUR VIEW OF THE GAINS.

The material gains are obvious: economic advancement, the shaping of material resources to meet age-old needs, the extension of our life spans, improvements in health, and so on. However, that's not actually my primary point.

I see the opportunity to expand our minds, to extend our learning, and to advance our ability to create and understand knowledge as an essential spiritual quest. Feigenbaum and McCorduck talk about this as an "audacious, some would say reckless, embarkation onto sacred ground."

SO WE RISK THE SURVIVAL OF THE HUMAN RACE FOR THIS SPIRITUAL QUEST?

Yeah, basically

I'M NOT SURPRISED THAT THE LUDDITES TAKE PAUSE.

Of course, keep in mind that it's the material, not the spiritual gains, that are seducing society down this path.

I'M STILL NOT COMFORTABLE WITH KACZYNSKI AS A SPOKESPERSON. HE IS A CONFESSED MURDERER, YOU KNOW.

Certainly, I'm glad he's behind bars, and his tactics deserve condemnation and punishment. Unfortunately, terrorism is effective, and that's why it survives.

I DON'T SEE IT THAT WAY. TERRORISM JUST UNDERMINES THE POSITIONS BEING PUBLICIZED. PEOPLE THEN SEE THE TERRORIST'S PROPOSITIONS AS CRAZY, OR AT LEAST MISGUIDED.

That's one reaction. But remember the society of mind. We have more than one reaction to terrorism.

One contingent in our heads says "those actions were evil and crazy, so the terrorist's thesis must also be evil and crazy."

But another contingent in our heads takes the view that "those actions were extreme, so he must have very strong feelings about this. Maybe there's something to it. Perhaps a more moderate version of his views are legitimate."

### SOUNDS LIKE THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HITLER'S "BIG LIE."

There's a similarity. In Hitler's case, both the tactics and the views were extreme. In the case of modern terrorists, the tactics are extreme; the views may or may not be. In Kaczynski's case, many aspects of his argument are reasonable. Of course, he does end up in an extreme place.

YEAH, A PRIMITIVE CABIN IN MONTANA.

That's where the manifesto ends up, too—we should all return to nature.

I DON'T THINK PEOPLE FOUND KACZYNSKI'S NOTION OF NATURE VERY APPEALING, AT LEAST NOT JUDGING BY PICTURES OF HIS CABIN.

And, as I said, there's not enough nature to go around anymore.

THANKS TO TECHNOLOGY.

And the population boom

ALSO FACILITATED BY TECHNOLOGY.

So we've passed the point of no return. It's already too late to go the nature route.

SO WHAT COURSE DO YOU RECOMMEND?

I would say that we shouldn't view the advance of technology as just an impersonal, inexorable force.

I THOUGHT YOU SAID THE ACCELERATING ADVANCE OF TECHNOLOGY AND COMPUTATION—WAS INEXORABLE; REMEMBER, THE LAW OF ACCELERATING RETURNS?

Uh, yes, the advance is inexorable all right, we're not going to stop technology. But we do have some choices. We have the opportunity to shape technology, and to channel its direction. I've tried to do that in my own work. We can step through the forest carefully WE'D BETTER GET BUSY, SOUNDS LIKE THERE ARE A LOT OF SLIPPERY SLOPES OUT THERE WAITING FOR US.

PART THREE

TO FACE THE FUTURE
