---
book: "The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence"
author: "Ray Kurzweil"
part: "2019"
type: source
---

# 2019

He who mounts a wild elephant goes where the wild elephant goes.

—Randolph Bourne

It does not do you good to leave a dragon out of your calculations, if you live near him.

—J. R. R. Tolkien

The Computer Itself

Computers are now largely invisible. They are embedded everywhere—in walls, tables, chairs, desks, clothing, jewelry, and bodies.

People routinely use three-dimensional displays built into their glasses, [1] or contact lenses. These "direct eye" displays create highly realistic, virtual visual environments overlaying the "real" environment. This display technology projects images directly onto the human retina, exceeds the resolution of human vision, and is widely used regardless of visual impairment. The direct-eye displays operate in three modes:

1. Head-directed display: The displayed images are stationary with respect to the position and orientation of your

head. When you move your head, the display moves relative to the real environment. This mode is often used

to interact with virtual documents.

2. Virtual-reality overlay display: The displayed images slide when you move or turn your head so that the virtual

people, objects, and environment appear to remain stationary in relation to the real environment (which you

can still see). Thus if the direct-eye display is displaying the image of a person (who could be a geographically

remote real person engaging in a three-dimensional visual phone call with you, or a computer-generated

"simulated" person), that projected person will appear to be in a particular place relative to the real

environment that you also see. When you move your head, that projected person will appear to remain in the

same place relative to the real environment.

3. Virtual-reality blocking display: This is the same as the virtual-reality overlay display except that the real

environment is blocked out, so you see only the projected virtual environment. You use this mode to leave

"real" reality and enter a virtual reality environment.

In addition to the optical lenses, there are auditory "lenses," which place high-resolution sounds in precise locations in a three-dimensional environment. These can be built into eyeglasses, worn as body jewelry, or implanted in the ear canal.

Keyboards are rare, although they still exist. Most interaction with computing is through gestures using hands, fingers, and facial expressions and through two-way natural-language spoken communication. People communicate with computers the same way they would communicate with a human assistant, both verbally and through visual expression. Significant attention is paid to the personality of computer-based personal assistants, with many choices available. Users can model the personality of their intelligent assistants on actual persons, including themselves, or select a combination of traits from a variety of both public personalities and private friends and associates.

Typically, people do not own just one specific "personal computer," although computing is nonetheless very personal. Computing and extremely-high-bandwidth communication are embedded everywhere. Cables have largely disappeared.

The computational capacity of a $4,000 computing device (in 1999 dollars) is approximately equal to the computational capability of the human brain (20 million billion calculations per second). [2] Of the total computing capacity of the human species (that is, all human brains) combined with the computing technology the species has created, more than 10 percent is nonhuman. [3]

Rotating memories and other electromechanical computing devices have been fully replaced with electronic devices. Three-dimensional nanotube lattices are now a prevalent form of computing circuitry.

The majority of "computes" of computers are now devoted to massively parallel neural nets and genetic algorithms.

Significant progress has been made in the scanning-based reverse engineering of the human brain. it is now fully recognized that the brain comprises many specialized regions, each with its own topology and architecture of interneuronal connections. The massively parallel algorithms are beginning to be understood, and these results have been applied to the design of machine-based neural nets. It is recognized that the human genetic code does not specify the precise interneuronal wiring of any of the regions, but rather sets up a rapid evolutionary process in which connections are established and fight for survival. The standard process for wiring machine-based neural nets uses a similar genetic evolutionary algorithm.

A new computer-controlled optical-imaging technology using quantum-based diffraction devices has replaced most lenses with tiny devices that can detect light waves from any angle. These pinhead-sized cameras are everywhere.

Autonomous nanoengineered machines can control their own mobility and include significant computational engines. These microscopic machines are beginning to be applied to commercial applications, particularly in manufacturing and process control, but are not yet in the mainstream.

Education

Hand-held displays are extremely thin, very high resolution, and weigh only ounces. People read documents either on the hand-held displays or, more commonly, from text that is projected into the ever present virtual environment using the ubiquitous direct-eye displays. Paper books and documents are rarely used or accessed. Most twentieth- century paper documents of interest have been scanned and are available through the wireless network.

Most learning is accomplished using intelligent software-based simulated teachers. To the extent that teaching is done by human teachers, the human teachers are often not in the local vicinity of the student. The teachers are viewed more as mentors and counselors than as sources of learning and knowledge.

Students continue to gather together to exchange ideas and to socialize, although even this gathering is often physically and geographically remote.

All students use computation. Computation in general is everywhere, so a student's not having a computer is rarely an issue.

Most adult human workers spend the majority of their time acquiring new skills and knowledge.

Disabilities

Blind persons routinely use eyeglass-mounted reading-navigation systems, which incorporate the new, digitally controlled, high-resolution optical sensors. These systems can read text in the real world, although since most print is now electronic, print-to-speech reading is less of a requirement. The navigation function of these systems, which emerged about ten years ago, is now perfected. These automated reading-navigation assistants communicate to blind users through both speech and tactile indicators. These systems are also widely used by sighted persons since they provide a high-resolution interpretation of the visual world.

Retinal and vision neural implants have emerged but have limitations and are used by only a small percentage of blind persons.

Deaf persons routinely read what other people are saying through the deaf persons' lens displays. There are systems that provide visual and tactile interpretations of other auditory experiences such as music, but there is debate regarding the extent to which these systems provide an experience comparable to that of a hearing person. Cochlear and other implants for improving hearing are very effective and are widely used.

Paraplegic and some quadriplegic persons routinely walk and climb stairs through a combination of computer- controlled nerve stimulation and exoskeletal robotic devices.

Generally, disabilities such as blindness, deafness, and paraplegia are not noticeable and are not regarded as significant.

Communication

You can do virtually anything with anyone regardless of physical proximity. The technology to accomplish this is easy to use and ever present.

"Phone" calls routinely include high-resolution three-dimensional images projected through the direct-eye displays and auditory lenses. Three-dimensional holography displays have also emerged. In either case, users feel as if they are physically near the other person. The resolution equals or exceeds optimal human visual acuity. Thus a person can be fooled as to whether or not another person is physically present or is being projected through electronic communication. The majority of "meetings" do not require physical proximity.

Routinely available communication technology includes high-quality speech-to-speech language translation for most common language pairs.

Reading books, magazines, newspapers, and other web documents, listening to music, watching three- dimensional moving images (for example, television, movies), engaging in three-dimensional visual phone calls, entering virtual environments (by yourself, or with others who may be geographically remote), and various combinations of these activities are all done through the ever present communications Web and do not require any equipment, devices, or objects that are not worn or implanted.

The all-enveloping tactile environment is now widely available and fully convincing. Its resolution equals or exceeds that of human touch and can simulate (and stimulate) all of the facets of the tactile sense, including the sensing of pressure, temperature, textures, and moistness. Although the visual and auditory aspects of virtual reality involve only devices you have on or in your body (the direct-eye lenses and auditory lenses), the "total touch" haptic environment requires entering a virtual reality booth. These technologies are popular for medical examinations, as well as sensual and sexual interactions with other human partners or simulated partners. In fact, it is often the preferred mode of interaction, even when a human partner is nearby, due to its ability to enhance both experience and safety.

Business and Economics

Rapid economic expansion and prosperity has continued.

The vast majority of transactions include a simulated person, featuring a realistic animated personality and two- way voice communication with high-quality natural-language understanding. Often, there is no human involved, as a human may have his or her automated personal assistant conduct transactions on his or her behalf with other automated personalities. In this case, the assistants skip the natural language and communicate directly by exchanging appropriate knowledge structures.

Household robots for performing cleaning and other chores are now ubiquitous and reliable.

Automated driving systems have been found to be highly reliable and have now been installed in nearly all roads. While humans are still allowed to drive on local roads (although not on highways), the automated driving systems are always engaged and are ready to take control when necessary to prevent accidents. Efficient personal flying vehicles using microflaps; have been demonstrated and are primarily computer controlled. There are very few transportation accidents.

Politics and Society

People are beginning to have relationships with automated personalities as companions, teachers, caretakers, and lovers. Automated personalities are superior to humans in some ways, such as having very reliable memories and, if desired, predictable (and programmable) personalities. They are not yet regarded as equal to humans in the subtlety of their personalities, although there is disagreement on this point.

An undercurrent of concern is developing with regard to the influence of machine intelligence. There continue to be differences between human and machine intelligence, but the advantages of human intelligence are becoming more difficult to identify and articulate. Computer intelligence is thoroughly interwoven into the mechanisms of civilization and is designed to be outwardly subservient to apparent human control. On the one hand, human transactions and decisions require by law a human agent of responsibility, even if fully initiated by machine

intelligence. On the other hand, few decisions are made without significant involvement and consultation with machine-based intelligence.

Public and private spaces are routinely monitored by machine intelligence to prevent interpersonal violence. People attempt to protect their privacy with near-unbreakable encryption technologies, but privacy continues to be a major political and social issue with each individual's practically every move stored in a database somewhere.

The existence of the human underclass continues as an issue. While there is sufficient prosperity to provide basic necessities (secure housing and food, among others) without significant strain to the economy, old controversies persist regarding issues of responsibility and opportunity. The issue is complicated by the growing component of most employment's being concerned with the employee's own learning and skill acquisition. In other words, the difference between those "productively" engaged and those who are not is not always clear.

The Arts

Virtual artists in all of the arts are emerging and are taken seriously. These cybernetic visual artists, musicians, and authors are usually affiliated with humans or organizations (which in turn are comprised of collaborations of humans and machines) that have contributed to their knowledge base and techniques. However, interest in the output of these creative machines has gone beyond the mere novelty of machines being creative.

Visual, musical, and literary art created by human artists typically involve a collaboration between human and machine intelligence.

The type of artistic and entertainment product in greatest demand (as measured by revenue generated) continues to be virtual-experience software, which ranges from simulations of "real" experiences to abstract environments with little or no corollary in the physical world.

Warfare

The primary threat to security comes from small groups combining human and machine intelligence using unbreakable encrypted communication. These include (1) disruptions to public information channels using software viruses, and (2) bioengineered disease agents.

Most flying weapons are tiny—some as small as insects with microscopic flying weapons being researched.

Health and Medicine

Many of the life processes encoded in the human genome, which was deciphered more than ten years earlier, are now largely understood, along with the information-processing mechanisms underlying aging and degenerative conditions such as cancer and heart disease. The expected life span, which, as a (1780 through 1900) and the first phase result of the first Industrial Revolution of the second (the twentieth century), almost doubled from less than forty, has now substantially increased again, to over one hundred.

There is increasing recognition of the danger of the widespread availability of bioengineering technology. The means exist for anyone with the level of knowledge and equipment available to a typical graduate student to create disease agents with enormous destructive potential. That this potential is offset to some extent by comparable gains in bioengineered antiviral treatments constitutes an uneasy balance, and is a major focus of international security agencies.

Computerized health monitors built into watches, jewelry, and clothing which diagnose both acute and chronic health conditions are widely used. in addition to diagnosis, these monitors provide a range of remedial recommendations and interventions.

Philosophy

There are prevalent reports of computers passing the Turing Test, although these instances do not meet the criteria (with regard to the sophistication of the human judge, the length of time for the interviews, etcetera) established by

knowledgeable observers. There is a consensus that computers have not yet passed a valid Turing Test, but there is growing controversy on this point.

The subjective experience of computer-based intelligence is seriously discussed, although the rights of machine intelligence have not yet entered mainstream debate. Machine intelligence is still largely the product of a collaboration between humans and machines, and has been programmed to maintain a subservient relationship to the species that created it.

OKAY, I'M HERE NOW. SORRY ABOUT BEING DISTRACTED TEN YEARS AGO.

No problem. How've you been?

I'M FINE—BUSY—BUT HOLDING UP. GETTING READY FOR MY SON'S TENTH BIRTHDAY PARTY.

Oh, so you were pregnant last time we spoke.

I WASN'T SHOWING YET, BUT PEOPLE DID NOTICE AT THE WEDDING.

How's he doing?.

OKAY, BUT JEREMY'S A LOT TO KEEP UP WITH.

Doesn't sound too unusual.

ANYWAY, I FOUND JEREMY WITH THIS OLDER WOMAN, LIKE MY AGE, LAST WEEK. LET'S JUST SAY, SHE DIDN'T HAVE ALL OF HER CLOTHES ON.

Oh, really.

TURNED OUT TO BE HIS FOURTH-GRADE TEACHER.

Gee, what was she doing?

WELL, HE'D BEEN OUT SICK, SO SHE WAS GIVING HIM HIS HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT.

Without all her clothes on?

OH, SHE HAD NO IDEA.

Of course, the image transformers, I forgot.

HE'S NOT SUPPOSED TO HAVE ACCESS TO THOSE PARTICULAR TRANSFORMERS. BUT HE APPARENTLY GOT A CHILD-BLOCK OVERRIDE PATCH FROM ONE OF HIS FRIENDS. HE WON'T SAY WHO.

Some things never change.

I THINK WE HAVE THE BLOCK BACK ON NOW.

So did you discuss this with his teacher?

MISS SIMON? OH GOD, NO.

Any punishment?

ACTIVATING THE CHILD-BLOCK OVERRIDE IS JUST NOT TOLERATED IN OUR HOME. HE'S RESTRICTED FROM THE SENSORIUM FORA MONTH.

That does sound serious. Sensorium? That's a virtual reality thing?

ACTUALLY, SENSORIUM IS A BRAND NAME FOR THE TOTAL TOUCH ENVIRONMENT WE HAVE. IT'S A NEW MODEL WITH SOME IMPROVED OLFACTORY TECHNOLOGY. FOR JUST VISUAL-AUDITORY VIRTUAL REALITY THAT'S PRETTY MUCH ON ALL THE TIME USING THE LENSES, YOU DON'T NEED TO USE ANYTHING SPECIAL.

So what does he do in the Sensorium?

OH, KICK BOXING, GALACTIC WRESTLING, THE USUAL TEN-YEAR-OLD STUFF. LATELY, HE'S BEEN PLAYING DOCTOR.

Uh oh, he sounds precocious.

THINK HE'S JUST TRYING TO TEST OUR PATIENCE.

So this incident with Miss Simon, that was in the Sensorium?

NO, THAT WAS JUST A VIRTUAL REALITY PHONE CALL. JEREMY WAS HERE IN THE KITCHEN. HE HAD MISS SIMON SITTING ON THE KITCHEN TABLE.

So if he's looking at her transformed image using his virtual reality lenses, how were you able to see her?

WELL, WE HAVE ACCESS TO OUR KIDS' VIRTUAL REALITY ENVIRONMENTS UP UNTIL AGE FOURTEEN.

I see, so you're simultaneously in your own virtual reality environment, and those of your children?

YES, AND DON'T FORGET REAL REALITY, NOT THAT VIRTUAL REALITY ISN'T REAL.

Isn't that confusing, seeing and hearing all these different environments overlaying each other?

WE DON'T HEAR OUR KIDS' VIRTUAL REALITY ENVIRONMENTS. THE NOISE WOULD DRIVE US CRAZY, AND KIDS NEED TO HAVE SOME PRIVACY, TOO. WE CAN ONLY HEAR REAL REALITY AND OUR OWN VIRTUAL REALITY. AND, WE CAN TUNE IN AND OUT OF OUR KIDS' VIRTUAL VISUAL REALITIES. SO I TUNED IN, AND THERE WAS MISS SIMON.

What else has he been punished for?

THREE MONTHS AGO, HE WAS BLOCKING OUR CHILD VIRTUAL REALITY ACCESS. I THINK HE GOT THAT FROM THE SAME FRIEND.

I'm not sure I blame him. I don't think I would want my mother looking in on my virtual reality all the time.

WE DON'T LOOK IN ALL THE TIME; WE'RE REALLY QUITE SELECTIVE. BUT YOU HAVE TO KEEP TRACK OF KIDS NOWADAYS. WE DON'T HAVE THIS PROBLEM WITH OUR DAUGHTER, EMILY.

She's . . .

SIX YEARS OLD LAST MONTH. SHE'S A REAL SWEETHEART. SHE JUST DEVOURS BOOKS.

At six, that's impressive. She reads them by herself?

BY HERSELF? HOW ELSE WOULD SHE READ THEM?

Well, you could read them to her.

I DO THAT SOMETIMES. BUT EMILY FEELS I'M NOT ACCOMMODATING ENOUGH. SO SHE HAS HARRY HIPPO READ THEM TO HER, AND HE DOES EXACTLY WHAT SHE WANTS, AND DOESN'T TALK BACK. OF COURSE. I WOULDN'T WANT A REAL HIPPOPOTAMUS SITTING ON MY KITCHEN TABLE.

Not with a partially clad Miss Simon there also.

IT DOES GET TO BE A CROWDED TABLE.

So when Harry Hippo reads to Emily, she follows along in her virtual book.

SHE CAN EITHER FOLLOW ALONG HERSELF, OR SHE CAN TURN THE HIGHLIGHTING ON. THE KIDS LET THEIR FAVORITE VIRTUAL FRIEND READ TO THEM, WHILE THEY WATCH THEIR VIRTUAL BOOKS WITH THE HIGHLIGHTING FEATURE. LATER ON, THEY TURN THE HIGHLIGHTING OFF, AND EVENTUALLY, THEY DON'T NEED HARRY HIPPO, EITHER.

Kind of like taking off the training wheels.

RIGHT. NOW, ONE THING THAT DOES GIVE ME COMFORT IS THAT I ALWAYS KNOW WHERE MY KIDS ARE.

In virtual reality?

NO, I'M TALKING ABOUT REAL REALITY. NOW FOR EXAMPLE, I CAN SEE THAT JEREMY IS TWO BLOCKS AWAY, HEADED IN THIS DIRECTION.

An embedded chip?

THAT'S A REASONABLE GUESS. BUT IT'S NOT A CHIP EXACTLY. IT'S ONE OF THE FIRST USEFUL NANOTECHNOLOGY APPLICATIONS. YOU EAT THIS STUFF.

Stuff?

YEAH, IT'S A PASTE, TASTES PRETTY GOOD, ACTUALLY. IT HAS MILLIONS OF LITTLE COMPUTERS—WE CALL THEM TRACKERS—WHICH WORK THEIR WAY INTO YOUR CELLS.

Some of them must get passed through.

THAT'S TRUE, AND THE TRACKERS THAT GET TOO FAR AWAY FROM THE REST OF THE TRACKERS THAT ARE STILL IN THE BODY JUST TURN THEMSELVES OFF. THE ONES THAT STAY IN YOUR BODY COMMUNICATE WITH EACH OTHER, AND WITH THE WEB.

The wireless Web?

YES, IT'S EVERYWHERE. SO I ALWAYS KNOW WHERE MY KIDS ARE. NEAT, HUH?

So does everybody have this?

KIDS ARE REQUIRED TO, SO I GUESS EVERYONE WILL HAVE IT EVENTUALLY. MANY ADULTS DO, BUT ADULTS CAN BLOCK THE TRACKING TRANSMISSION IF THEY WISH.

Kids can't?

TRACKER BLOCKING IS SOMETHING WE REALLY DO MANAGE TO KEEP FROM OUR KIDS.

So Jeremy hasn't gotten his hands on any tracker-blocking software?

I CERTAINLY HOPE NOT. ALTHOUGH, COME TO THINK OF IT, WE DID HAVE A TRACKER LAPSE LAST YEAR. THE TECHNICIAN SAID IT WAS A TEMPORARY PROTOCOL CONFLICT. I DOUBT THAT WAS JEREMY'S DOING. BUT NOW YOU'VE GOT ME WORRIED.

I doubt Jeremy would do something like that.

I THINK YOU'RE RIGHT.

This technician was human?

NO, THE PROBLEM WASN'T THAT SERIOUS. WE JUST USED A LEVEL-B TECHNICIAN.

I see. So is your husband plugged into the tracking system?

YEAH, BUT HE BLOCKS IT A LOT, WHICH IS ANNOYING.

Well, husbands are entitled to some privacy, too, don't you think?

YES, DEFINITELY.

So, any other relatives you want to tell me about?

THERE'S MY TWENTY-FIVE-YEAR-OLD NEPHEW, STEPHEN. HE'S A BIT RECLUSIVE; I KNOW MY SISTER IS WORRIED ABOUT HIM. HE SPENDS ALMOST ALL OF HIS TIME IN EITHER TOTAL TOUCH OR IN VIRTUAL- REALITY BLOCKING-DISPLAY MODE.

That's a problem?

IT'S NOT JUST THAT HE BLOCKS OUT REAL REALITY, IT'S THAT HE SEEMS TO AVOID INTERACTING WITH REAL PEOPLE, EVEN IN VIRTUAL REALITY. IT SEEMS TO BE AN INCREASINGLY COMMON PROBLEM.

I guess simulated people are more accommodating.

THEY CAN BE. I MEAN, MY OWN ASSISTANTS AND COMPANIONS ARE, BUT TRY DEALING WITH OTHER PEOPLE'S ASSISTANTS, AND THAT'S A DIFFERENT MATTER. ANYWAY, MY SISTER WAS TELLING ME HOW SHE THOUGHT THAT STEPHEN WAS A CYBER VIRGIN, OR DID SHE SAY VIRTUAL VIRGIN?

Oh dear, now what was the distinction again?

YOU KNOW, A CYBER VIRGIN HAS NEVER HAD INTERCOURSE OUTSIDE OF VIRTUAL REALITY, WHEREAS A VIRTUAL VIRGIN HAS NEVER HAD INTERCOURSE WITH A REAL PERSON, EVEN IN VIRTUAL REALITY.

How about someone who has never been intimate with a real or simulated person in real or virtual reality?

HMM, WE DON'T SEEM TO HAVE A TERM FOR THAT.

So what are the statistics on this?

WELL, LET'S SEE, GEORGE WILL GET THAT FOR US.

George is your virtual assistant?

YEAH, YOU CATCH ON QUICKLY.

Gee, thanks.

SO, FOR ADULTS OVER TWENTY-FIVE, 11 PERCENT ARE VIRTUAL VIRGINS, AND 19 PERCENT ARE CYBER VIRGINS.

So I guess virtual sex is catching on. How about you and Ben?

WELL, I DEFINITELY PREFER THE REAL THING!

Real, as in . . .

REAL REALITY, RIGHT.

So you prefer intimacy in real reality, meaning you don't avoid the virtual alternative?

WELL, IT'S RIGHT THERE, MEAN WE'D HAVE TO GO OUT OF OUR WAY TO AVOID IT. IT'S CERTAINLY CONVENIENT IF I'M TRAVELING, OR IF WE DON'T WANT TO WORRY ABOUT BIRTH CONTROL.

Or STDS.

WELL, THAT SHOULDN'T BE AN ISSUE.

Hey, you never know.

WELL, TO BE PERFECTLY HONEST, VIRTUAL SEX IS MUCH MORE SATISFACTORY IN MANY WAYS. I MEAN IT'S DEFINITELY MORE INTENSE, PRETTY INCREDIBLE ACTUALLY.

This is in the Sensorium, I assume.

YEAH, SURE. THIS RECENT MODEL HAS REALLY ADDRESSED THE OLFACTORY ISSUE.

Meaning it has an olfactory capability?

RIGHT. IT'S A LITTLE DIFFERENT THAN THE OTHER SENSES, THOUGH. WITH THE VISUAL AND AUDITORY SENSE, JUST PLAIN OLD UBIQUITOUS VIRTUAL REALITY IS EXTREMELY ACCURATE. IN THE SENSORIUM, WE GET THE TACTILE ENVIRONMENT, WHICH ALSO PROVIDES AN EXTREMELY LIFELIKE RE-CREATION. BUT WE CAN'T DO THAT YET WITH THE SENSE OF SMELL. SO THE SENSORIUM 2000 HAS PROGRAMMED SCENTS, WHICH YOU CAN CHOOSE, OR THAT ARE AUTOMATICALLY SELECTED IN THE COURSE OF AN EXPERIENCE. THEY'RE STILL PRETTY EFFECTIVE.

How do you feel about your husband interacting sexually with a simulated partner?

YOU MEAN, A SIMULATED PERSON IN VIRTUAL REALITY?

Yeah, in virtual reality or in the Sensorium.

THAT'S FINE. I HAVE NO PROBLEM WITH THAT.

You don't mind?

THERE'S REALLY NO WAY I COULD KEEP TRACK OF IT.

Virtual lipstick on his collar?

YEAH, RIGHT, ON HIS VIRTUAL COLLAR. VIRTUAL SEX WITH SIMULATED PARTNERS IS GENERALLY ACCEPTED NOWADAYS. IT'S REALLY REGARDED AS A FORM OF FANTASY—IT'S JUST ASSISTED FANTASY.

And if the partner's a real person in virtual reality?

I'D BREAK HIS LEGS.

His virtual legs?

THAT'S NOT WHAT I HAD IN MIND.

So what's the difference between a real person in virtual reality and a simulated person?

AS SENSUAL PARTNERS?

Right.

OH, THERE'S A DIFFERENCE—THE SIMULATED PARTNERS ARE PRETTY GOOD, BUT IT'S JUST NOT THE SAME.

Sounds like you've had some experience with this yourself.

PRETTY NOSY, AREN'T YOU?

All right, I'll change the subject. Let's see, uh, what's happening with encryption?

WE HAVE VERY STABLE THOUSAND-BIT CODES. IT'S NOT PRACTICAL TO BREAK THEM.

What about with a quantum computer?

THE QUANTUM COMPUTERS DON'T SEEM TO BE STABLE WITH MORE THAN A FEW HUNDRED QU-BITS.

Sounds like communication is pretty secure.

I WOULD SAY SO. BUT SOME PEOPLE ARE PARANOID ABOUT THE THIRD-PARTY KEYS.

So the authorities have keys?

OF COURSE.

Well, can't you just put another layer of encryption without a key over the official layer?

GOD, NO.

Why is that so hard?

OH, IT'S NOT DIFFICULT TECHNICALLY. IT'S JUST VERY ILLEGAL, CERTAINLY SINCE OCTOBER 2013.

WE MANAGED TO GET THROUGH THE FIRST DECADE OF THIS CENTURY WITHOUT TOO SERIOUS A PROBLEM. BUT THINGS GOT OUT OF CONTROL IN THE OKLAHOMA INCIDENT.

Oklahoma again. So this was a software virus?

NO, NOT A SOFTWARE VIRUS, A BIOLOGICAL VIRUS. A DISGRUNTLED—I WOULD SAY DEMENTED— STUDENT, ACTUALLY A FORMER STUDENT AT THE UNIVERSITY THERE. THERE WERE REPORTS THAT HE WAS LINKED TO THE REMEMBER YORK MOVEMENT, BUT THE RY DISCUSSION LEADERS VEHEMENTLY DENIED ANY RESPONSIBILITY.

Remember York?

WELL, THIS INCIDENT OCCURRED ON THE TWO HUNDREDTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE YORK TRIALS.

Oh, you mean the 1813 trial of the Luddites?

YES, EXCEPT THAT MOST ANTITECHNOLOGISTS DON'T LIKE THE TERM LUDDITE ANYMORE; THEY FEEL THAT THE SOMEWHAT SILLY IMAGE OF NED LUDD BELITTLES THE SERIOUS NATURE OF THEIR MOVEMENT. BEYOND THAT, THE BEST EVIDENCE SUGGESTS THAT LUDD NEVER EXISTED.

But there was a trial in 1813.

YES, WHICH RESULTED IN MANY OF THE GANG MEMBERS ACCUSED OF WRECKING THE TEXTILE MACHINES BEING HANGED OR EXILED.

So RY is an organized movement?

OH, I WOULDN'T SAY THAT. IT IS MORE OF A WEB DISCUSSION GROUP, AND THIS YOUNG MAN APPARENTLY HAD PARTICIPATED IN SOME OF THOSE DISCUSSIONS. BUT THE RY PEOPLE ARE BASICALLY NONVIOLENT. THEY WERE DISTRESSED THAT ROBERTS HAD ASSOCIATED HIMSELF WITH THEM.

Roberts was the perpetrator?

YEAH, CONVICTED ON ALL COUNTS. BUT ASIDE FROM THIS ONE DISTURBED INDIVIDUAL, I WOULD SAY IT WAS REALLY A SCREWUP BY THE BWA.

BWA?

BIOWARFARE AGENCY.

So this was a virus that was unleashed?

YES, JUST A STANDARD MODIFIED FLU VIRUS, ALTHOUGH THERE WAS A TWIST. IT HAD A GREATLY INCREASED MUTATION RATE, WHICH ACCELERATED ITS EVOLUTION AT SEVERAL LEVELS. ONE FORM

OF THE VIRUS'S EVOLUTION ONLY TOOK PLACE DURING AN INFECTION. THIS, TOGETHER WITH A TIME- BOMB PROGRAM IN THE VIRUS'S DNA, CAUSED ULTRA-RAPID VIRAL REPRODUCTION AFTER A FEW HOURS OF INFECTION. THIS LITTLE COMPLEXITY DELAYED THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN ANTIDOTE FOR FORTY-EIGHT HOURS. BUT THAT WASN'T THE WORST OF IT. AFTER TWENTY-FOUR HOURS OF REPLICATING THE ANTIDOTE, THE BWA DISCOVERED THAT ANOTHER BIOLOGICAL AGENT HAD INFECTED THE BATCHES, SO THEY HAD TO START OVER. AND THEN, THERE WEREN'T ENOUGH REPLICATION STATIONS, SO THEY HAD TO CLEAN OUT THE ONES THEY HAD JUST USED, AND GO FROM THERE. FORTY-EIGHT HOURS WERE LOST IN THIS FIASCO, AND SIXTEEN THOUSAND PEOPLE DIED. WELL, IF THINGS HAD BEEN DELAYED FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FOUR HOURS, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN FAR WORSE. IT WAS A BIG ISSUE IN THE MIDTERM ELECTIONS OF 2014. THERE'VE BEEN A LOT OF CHANGES SINCE THEN.

The third-party keys?

YEAH, THOSE EXISTED BEFORE. BUT SINCE 2013 THE LAWS AGAINST KEYLESS ENCRYPTION CODES HAVE BEEN RIGOROUSLY ENFORCED.

What else has changed?

THERE ARE PLENTY OF ANTIVIRAL REPLICATION STATIONS NOW. AND WE ALL HAVE THESE CUTE LITTLE GAS MASKS.

That little thimble is a gas mask?

YEAH, WELL, IT UNFOLDS LIKE THIS. IT'S SMALL, SO WE'RE ENCOURAGED TO KEEP THEM CLOSE AT HAND. IT'S ACTUALLY A VIRAL SCREEN MASK. OCCASIONALLY, WE'RE TOLD TO PUT THEM ON, BUT GENERALLY IT'S ONLY FOR A FEW HOURS. SINCE 2013, THERE HAVE BEEN ONLY FALSE ALARMS.

So I guess the security agencies have been hard at work.

AS WILL ROGERS USED TO SAY, "YOU CAN'T SAY THAT CIVILIZATION DON'T ADVANCE, FOR IN EVERY

### WAR THEY KILL YOU IN A NEW WAY."

2013 sounds tragic and frightening. As centuries go, however, it doesn't sound like you're doing too badly. In the twentieth century, we knew how to have disasters.

YEAH, FIFTY MILLION PEOPLE DIED IN WORLD WAR II.

Indeed.

IT'S TRUE THAT THE CENTURY SO FAR HAS SEEN MUCH LESS BLOODSHED. BUT THE OTHER SIDE OF THE COIN IS THAT THE TECHNOLOGIES ARE SO MUCH MORE POWERFUL TODAY. IF SOMETHING DID GO WRONG, THINGS COULD SPIRAL OUT OF CONTROL VERY QUICKLY. WITH BIOENGINEERING, FOR EXAMPLE, IT FEELS A LITTLE LIKE ALL TEN BILLION OF US ARE STANDING IN A ROOM UP TO OUR KNEES IN A FLAMMABLE FLUID, WAITING FOR SOMEONE—ANYONE—TO LIGHT A MATCH.

But it sounds like a lot of fire extinguishers have been installed.

YEAH, I JUST HOPE THEY WORK.

You know, I've been concerned about the downside of bioengineering for well over a decade now.

BUT YOU DIDN'T WRITE ABOUT IT IN THE AGE OF INTELLIGENT MACHINES, WHICH YOU WROTE IN THE LATE 1980s.

That was a conscious decision. I didn't want to give the wrong person any ideas.

AND IN 1999?

Oh, the cat's out of the bag now.

YEAH, WELL, WE'VE BEEN SCURRYING AFTER THE DESCENDANTS OF THAT CAT FOR THE LAST COUPLE OF DECADES, TRYING TO KEEP THEM FROM CAUSING TOO MUCH MISCHIEF.

Just wait until the nanopathogens get going.

FORTUNATELY, THEY'RE NOT SELF-REPLICATING.

Not yet.

I SUPPOSE THAT'S COMING, TOO, BUT THE TRACKER PASTE AND THE OTHER FEW NANOTECHNOLOGY APPLICATIONS THAT ARE OUT THERE TODAY ARE MADE USING X-RAY LITHOGRAPHY AND OTHER CONVENTIONAL MANUFACTURING TECHNIQUES.

Well, enough of disasters, what are you up to tonight?

I'M GIVING A LECTURE ON MY EXPERIENCE LAST WEEK AS A TURING TEST JUDGE.

I assume the computer lost.

YES, SHE DID. BUT IT WASN'T THE SLAM DUNK I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE. AT THE BEGINNING, I WAS THINKING, GEE, THIS IS A LOT HARDER THAN I HAD EXPECTED. I REALLY CAN'T TELL WHO THE COMPUTER IS, OR WHO THE HUMAN FOIL IS. AFTER ABOUT TWENTY MINUTES, IT DID BECOME FAIRLY CLEAR TO ME, AND I'M GLAD I HAD ENOUGH TIME. A FEW OF THE OTHER JUDGES JUST HAD NO IDEA, BUT THEY WEREN'T VERY SOPHISTICATED.

I guess your communications background came in handy.

ACTUALLY IT WAS MORE MY MOMMY BACKGROUND. I BECAME SUSPICIOUS WHEN SHEILA—SHE WAS THE COMPUTER—STARTED TALKING ABOUT HOW ANGRY SHE WAS AT HER DAUGHTER. THAT WAS NOT CONVINCING FOR ME. SHE JUST WASN'T SYMPATHETIC ENOUGH.

How about George, how would he fare in a Turing Test?

OH, I WOULDN'T WANT TO SUBJECT GEORGE TO THAT.

You're concerned about his feelings?

I GUESS YOU COULD SAY THAT. I KIND OF GO BACK AND FORTH. SOMETIMES, I THINK I'M NOT. BUT THEN WHEN I'M INTERACTING WITH HIM, I FIND MYSELF ACTING AS IF HE HAS FEELINGS. AND, SOMETIMES, I LOOK FORWARD TO TELLING HIM SOMETHING I'VE EXPERIENCED, PARTICULARLY IF WE'RE WORKING ON IT TOGETHER.

I see you picked a male assistant.

SURE, YOUR PREDICTION THAT WOMEN WOULD PREFER FEMALE PERSONALITIES WAS ANOTHER MISS.

That prediction was for 2009, not 2019.

I'M GLAD YOU CLARIFIED THAT. COME TO THINK OF IT, I DID USE A FEMALE PERSONALITY IN 2009, BUT THEY WEREN'T VERY REALISTIC THEN. ANYWAY, I HAVE TO GET GOING TO MY LECTURE. BUT IF I THINK OF ANYTHING ELSE INTERESTING TO TELL YOU, I'LL HAVE MY VIRTUAL ASSISTANT CONTACT YOURS.

Hey, I don't have one, remember I'm stuck in 1999.

TOO BAD. I GUESS I'LL JUST HAVE TO VISIT YOU MYSELF THEN.
