---
book: "The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence"
author: "Ray Kurzweil"
part: "2029"
type: source
---

# 2029

I'm as fond of my body as anyone else, but if I can be 200 with a body of silicon, I'll take it.

—Danny Hillis

The Computer Itself

A $1,000 unit of computation (in circa-1999 dollars) has the computing capacity of approximately 1,000 human brains (1,000 times 20 million billion—that is, 2 times 1019 calculations per second).

Of the total computing capacity of the human species (that is, all human brains) combined with the computing technology humans initiated the creation of, more than 99 percent is nonhuman.

The vast majority of "computes" of nonhuman computing is now conducted on massively parallel neural nets, much of which is based on the reverse engineering of the human brain.

Many—but less than a majority—of the specialized regions of the human brain have been "decoded" and their massively parallel algorithms have been deciphered. The number of specialized regions, amounting to hundreds, is greater than was anticipated twenty years earlier. The topologies and architectures of those regions that have been successfully reverse engineered are used in machine-based neural nets. The machine-based nets are substantially faster and have greater computing and memory capacities and other refinements compared to their human analogues.

Displays are now implanted in the eyes, with a choice of permanent implants or removable implants (similar to contact lenses). Images are projected directly onto the retina providing the usual high-resolution three-dimensional overlay on the physical world. These implanted visual displays also act as cameras to capture visual images and thus are both input and output devices.

Cochlear implants, originally used just for the hearing impaired, are now ubiquitous. These implants provide auditory communication in both directions between the human user and the worldwide computing network.

Direct neural pathways have been perfected for high-bandwidth connection to the human brain. This allows bypassing certain neural regions (for example, visual pattern recognition, long-term memory) and augmenting or replacing the functions of these regions with computing performed either in a neural implant or externally.

A range of neural implants is becoming available to enhance visual and auditory perception and interpretation, memory, and reasoning.

Computing processes can be personal (accessible by one individual), shared (accessible to a group), or universal (accessible to everyone), at the user's option.

Three-dimensional projected holographic displays are everywhere.

Microscopic nanoengineered robots now have microbrains with the computing speed and capacity of the human brain. They are widely used in industrial applications and are beginning to be used in medical applications (see "Health and Medicine").

Education

Human learning is primarily accomplished using virtual teachers and is enhanced by the widely available neural implants. The implants improve memory and perception, but it is not yet possible to download knowledge directly. Although enhanced through virtual experiences, intelligent interactive instruction, and neural implants, learning still

requires time-consuming human experience and study. This activity comprises the primary focus of the human species.

Automated agents are learning on their own without human spoon-feeding of information and knowledge. Computers have read all available human and machine-generated literature and multimedia material, which includes written, auditory, visual, and virtual experience works.

Significant new knowledge is created by machines with little or no human intervention. Unlike humans, machines easily share knowledge structures with one another.

Disabilities

The prevalence of highly intelligent visual navigation devices for the blind, speech-to-print display devices for the deaf, nerve stimulation, intelligent orthotic prosthetics for the physically disabled, and a variety of neural implant technologies has essentially eliminated the handicaps associated with most disabilities. Sensory-enhancement devices are in fact used by most of the population.

Communication

In addition to the ubiquitous, three-dimensional virtual environments, there has been significant refinement to three- dimensional holographic technology for visual communication. There is also projected sonic communication for precisely placing sounds in three-dimensional space. Similar to virtual reality, much of what is seen and heard in "real" reality also has no physical counterpart. Thus family members can be sitting around the living room enjoying one another's company without being physically proximate.

In addition, there is extensive use of communication using direct neural connections. This allows virtual, all- enveloping tactile communication to take place without entering a "total touch enclosure," as was necessary ten years earlier.

The majority of communication does not involve a human. The majority of communication involving a human is between a human and a machine.

Business and Economics

The human population has leveled off in size at around 12 billion real persons. The basic necessities of food, shelter, and security are available for the vast majority of the human population.

Human and nonhuman intelligences are primarily focused on the creation of knowledge in its myriad forms, and there is significant struggle over intellectual property rights, including ever increasing levels of litigation.

There is almost no human employment in production, agriculture, and transportation. The largest profession is education. There are many more lawyers than doctors.

Politics and Society

Computers appear to be passing forms of the Turing Test deemed valid by both human and nonhuman authorities, although controversy on this point persists. It is difficult to cite human capabilities of which machines are incapable. Unlike human competence, which varies greatly from person to person, computers consistently perform at optimal levels and are able to readily share their skills and knowledge with one another.

A sharp division no longer exists between the human world and the machine world. Human cognition is being ported to machines, and many machines have personalities, skills, and knowledge bases derived from the reverse engineering of human intelligence. Conversely, neural implants based on machine intelligence are providing enhanced perceptual and cognitive functioning to humans.

Defining what constitutes a human being is emerging as a significant legal and political issue.

The rapidly growing capability of machines is controversial, but there is no effective resistance to it. Since machine intelligence was initially designed to be subservient to human control, it has not presented a threatening "face" to the

human population. Humans realize that disengaging the now human-machine civilization from its dependence on machine intelligence is not possible. Discussion of the legal rights of machines is growing, particularly those of machines that are independent of humans (those not embedded in a human brain). Although not yet fully recognized by law, the pervasive influence of machines in all levels of decision making is providing significant protection to machines.

The Arts

Cybernetic artists in all of the arts—musical, visual, literary, virtual experience, and all others—no longer need to associate themselves with humans or organizations that include humans. Many of the leading artists are machines.

Health and Medicine

Progress continues in understanding and ameliorating the effects of aging as a result of a thorough understanding of the information—processing processes controlled through the genetic code. The life expectancy of humans continues to increase and is now around 120 years. Significant attention is being paid to the psychological ramifications of a substantially increased human life span.

There is growing recognition that continuing extensions to the human life span will involve further use of bionic organs, including portions of the brain. Nanobots are being used as scouts, to a limited extent as repair agents in the bloodstream, and as building blocks for bionic organs.

Philosophy

Although computers routinely pass apparently valid forms of the Turing Test, controversy persists about whether or not machine intelligence equals human intelligence in all of its diversity At the same time, it is clear that there are many ways in which machine intelligence is vastly superior to human intelligence. For reasons of political sensitivity, machine intelligences generally do not press the point of their superiority. The distinction between human and machine intelligence is blurring as machine intelligence is increasingly derived from the design of human intelligence, and human intelligence is increasingly enhanced by machine intelligence.

The subjective experience of machine intelligence is increasingly accepted, particularly since "machines" participate in this discussion.

Machines claim to be conscious and to have as wide an array of emotional and spiritual experiences as their human progenitors, and these claims are largely accepted.

I HOPE YOU'RE HAVING A GOOD TIME MAKING ALL THESE PREDICTIONS.

This part of the book is a bit more fun to write—at least there are fewer references to look up. And I don't have to worry about being embarrassed for at least a few decades.

WELL, IT MIGHT BE EASIER IF YOU JUST ASKED ME FOR MY IMPRESSIONS.

Yes, I was just getting to that. But I must say, you look very well.

FOR AN OLD LADY.

I wasn't thinking old. But you don't look anywhere near fifty. More like thirty-five.

YES, WELL, FIFTY ISN'T AS OLD AS IT USED TO BE.

We feel that way in 1999, too.

IT'S STILL HELPFUL TO EAT RIGHT. WE ALSO HAVE A FEW TRICKS YOU DIDN'T HAVE. [2]

Nanoengineered bodies?

NO, NOT EXACTLY, NANOTECHNOLOGY IS STILL FAIRLY LIMITED. Bioengineering HAS CERTAINLY HELPED THE MOST. AGING HAS BEEN DRAMATICALLY SLOWED. MOST DISEASES CAN BE PREVENTED OR REVERSED.

So nanotechnology is still fairly primitive?

I'D SAY SO. I MEAN, WE DO HAVE NANOBOTS IN OUR BLOODSTREAMS, BUT THEY'RE PRIMARILY DIAGNOSTIC. SO IF ANYTHING STARTS TO GO WRONG, WE CATCH IT VERY EARLY.

So if a nanobot discovers a microscopic infection or other problem developing, what does it do, just start yelling?

YEAH, THAT'S ABOUT IT. I DON'T THINK WE'D TRUST IT TO DO MUCH ELSE. IT YELLS TO THE WEB, AND THEN THE PROBLEM GETS TAKEN CARE OF WHEN WE SIT DOWN FOR OUR NEXT DAILY SCAN.

A three-dimensional scan?

OF COURSE, WE STILL HAVE THREE-DIMENSIONAL BODIES.

This is a diagnostic scan?

THE SCAN HAS A DIAGNOSTIC FUNCTION. BUT IT'S ALSO REMEDIAL. THE SCANNER CAN APPLY SUFFICIENT ENERGY TO A SMALL THREE-DIMENSIONAL SET OF POINTS TO DESTROY A COLONY OF PATHOGENS OR PROBLEMATICAL CELLS BEFORE THEY GET OUT OF HAND.

Is this an electromagnetic energy beam, or a particle beam, or what?

WELL, GEORGE CAN EXPLAIN IT BETTER THAN I CAN. AS I UNDERSTAND IT, IT HAS TWO ENERGY BEAMS THAT ARE BENIGN BY THEMSELVES, BUT CAUSE PARTICLE EMISSIONS AT THE POINT AT WHICH THEY CROSS. I'LL ASK GEORGE NEXT TIME I SEE HIM.

When's that going to be?

OH, JUST AS SOON AS I GET DONE WITH YOU.

You're not rushing me, are you?

OH, THERE'S NO HURRY. IT'S ALWAYS A GOOD IDEA TO BE PATIENT.

Hmmm. So when was the last time the two of you were together?

A FEW MINUTES AGO.

I see. Sounds like your relationship has developed.

OH, IT HAS. HE TAKES VERY GOOD CARE OF ME.

Last time we talked, you weren't sure whether he had any feelings.

THAT WAS A LONG TIME AGO. GEORGE IS A DIFFERENT PERSON EVERY DAY. HE JUST GROWS AND LEARNS CONSTANTLY. HE DOWNLOADS WHATEVER KNOWLEDGE HE WANTS FROM THE WEB AND IT BECOMES PART OF HIM. HE'S SO SMART AND INTENSE, AND VERY SPIRITUAL.

I'm awfully happy for you. But how does Ben feel about you and George?

HE WASN'T TOO CRAZY ABOUT IT, THAT'S FOR SURE.

But you've worked it out?

WE'VE WORKED IT OUT, ALL RIGHT. WE BROKE UP THREE YEARS AGO.

I'm sorry to hear that.

YEAH, WELL, SEVENTEEN YEARS IS DEFINITELY ABOVE AVERAGE, AS MARRIAGES GO THESE DAYS.

It must have been hard on the kids.

THAT'S TRUE. BUT WE BOTH HAVE DINNER WITH EMILY JUST ABOUT EVERY NIGHT.

You both have dinner with Emily, but not with each other?

EMILY CERTAINLY DOESN'T WANT TO HAVE DINNER WITH US TOGETHER—THAT WOULDN'T BE VERY COMFORTABLE, NOW WOULD IT? SO SHE HAS DINNER WITH US APART.

I see, the good old kitchen table. Now that you don't have to deal with Harry Hippo or Miss Simon, there's room for you and Ben and Emily, but you and Ben don't have to actually see each other.

ISN'T VIRTUAL REALITY GREAT?

Yeah, but too bad people can't touch each other without going into the Sensorium.

ACTUALLY, SENSORIUM WENT OUT OF BUSINESS.

Okay, then, total touch.

WE DON'T NEED TO GO INTO A TOTAL TOUCH ENVIRONMENT ANYMORE, NOT SINCE THE SPINAL IMPLANTS BECAME AVAILABLE.

So these implants add the tactile environment . . .

TO THE UBIQUITOUS VISUAL AND AUDITORY ENVIRONMENTS WE'VE HAD FOR MANY YEARS WITH VIRTUAL REALITY, THAT'S RIGHT.

Sounds like the implants must be pretty popular.

NO, THEY'RE FAIRLY NEW. ALMOST EVERYONE HAS THE VISUAL AND AUDITORY ENVIRONMENTS NOW, EITHER AS IMPLANTS OR AT LEAST AS VISUAL AND SONIC LENSES. BUT THE TACTILE IMPLANTS HAVEN'T QUITE CAUGHT ON YET.

Yet you have them?

YEAH, THEY'RE REALLY FABULOUS. THERE ARE A FEW GLITCHES, BUT I LIKE BEING ON THE CUTTING EDGE. IT WAS SUCH A HASSLE HAVING TO USE A TOTAL TOUCH ENVIRONMENT.

Now I can understand how implants could simulate your sense of touch, by generating the nerve impulses that correspond to a particular set of tactile stimuli. But the total touch environments also provided force feedback, so if you're touching a virtual person, you don't end up sticking your hand through her body.

WELL, SURE, BUT WE DON'T MOVE OUR PHYSICAL BODIES IN VIRTUAL REALITY You move your virtual body, of course. And the virtual reality system prevents you from moving your virtual hand through a barrier—like someone else's virtual body—in the virtual environment. This all happens using the implants?

RIGHT.

So you could be sitting here talking to me in real reality, while at the same time getting intimate with George in virtual reality, and with full tactile realism?

WE CALL IT TACTILE VIRTUALISM, BUT YOU'VE GOT THE IDEA. HOWEVER, THE TACTILE SEPARATION BETWEEN REAL AND VIRTUAL REALITY IS NOT PERFECT. I MEAN, THIS IS STILL A NEW TECHNOLOGY. SO IF GEORGE AND I GOT TOO PASSIONATE, I THINK YOU'D NOTICE.

That's too bad.

IT'S NOT A PROBLEM, THOUGH, IN GENERAL, SINCE I ATTEND MOST MEETINGS WITH A VIRTUAL BODY, ANYWAY. SO WHEN I GET RESTLESS IN THESE INTERMINABLE MEETINGS ON THE CENSUS PROJECT, I CAN SPEND A FEW PRIVATE MOMENTS WITH GEORGE . . .

Using yet another virtual body?

EXACTLY.

And the tactile separation problem between real reality and one of your virtual realities isn't a problem with two virtual bodies.

NOT REALLY, BUT SOMETIMES PEOPLE CATCH ME SMILING A LOT.

You mentioned glitches . . .

SOMETIMES I FEEL LIKE SOMETHING OR SOMEONE IS TOUCHING ME, BUT IT MIGHT JUST BE MY IMAGINATION.

It's probably just a worker from the neural implant company remotely testing out the equipment.

HMMM.

So you're working on the census?

IT'S SUPPOSED TO BE AN HONOR. I MEAN IT'S LIKE THE HOT ISSUE RIGHT NOW. BUT IT'S JUST ENDLESS POLITICS. AND ENDLESS MEETINGS.

Well, the census has always used the most cutting-edge technology. Electrical data processing got its start with the 1890 U.S. census, you know.

TELL ME ABOUT IT. THAT GETS MENTIONED AT LEAST THREE TIMES EVERY MEETING. BUT THE ISSUE'S NOT TECHNOLOGY.

It's . . .

WHO'S A PERSON. THERE ARE PROPOSALS TO START COUNTING VIRTUAL PERSONS OF AT LEAST HUMAN LEVEL, BUT THERE'S NO END OF PROBLEMS WITH COMING UP WITH A VIABLE PROPOSAL. VIRTUAL PERSONS ARE NOT SO READILY COUNTABLE AND DISTINCT, SINCE THEY CAN COMBINE WITH ONE ANOTHER, OR SPLIT UP INTO MULTIPLE APPARENT PERSONALITIES.

Why don't you just count machines that were derived from specific persons?

THERE ARE SOME CYBERNETIC PERSONALITIES WHO CLAIM THAT THEY USED TO BE A PARTICULAR PERSON, BUT THEY'RE REALLY JUST PERSONALITY EMULATIONS. THE COMMISSION JUST DIDN'T THINK IT WAS APPROPRIATE.

I would agree—personality emulation just doesn't cut it. It should be the result of a full neural scan.

PERSONALLY, I'VE BEEN LEANING TO EXPANDING THE DEFINITION, BUT I'VE HAD DIFFICULTY COMING UP WITH A COHERENT METHODOLOGY. THE COMMISSION DID AGREE TO LOOK AT THE PROBLEM AGAIN WHEN THE NEURAL SCANS ARE EXPANDED TO A MAJORITY OF NEURAL REGIONS. IT'S A TOUGH ISSUE, THOUGH. WE DO HAVE PEOPLE WHO HAVE THE VAST MAJORITY OF THEIR MENTAL COMPUTES TAKING PLACE IN THEIR NANOTUBE IMPLANTS. BUT THE POLITICS SEEMS TO REQUIRE AT LEAST SOME UNENHANCED ORIGINAL SUBSTRATE TO BE COUNTED.

Original substrate? You mean human neurons?

RIGHT. IF YOU DON'T REQUIRE SOME NEURON-BASED THINKING, IT JUST GETS IMPOSSIBLE TO COUNT DISTINCT MINDS. YET SOME OF THE MACHINES DO MANAGE TO GET COUNTED. THEY SEEM TO ENJOY ESTABLISHING A HUMAN IDENTITY AND PASSING FOR A HUMAN. IT'S A BIT OF A GAME.

There must be legal benefits to having a recognized human identity.

THERE'S KIND OF A STANDOFF. THE OLD LEGAL SYSTEM STILL REQUIRES A HUMAN AGENT OF RESPONSIBILITY. BUT THE SAME ISSUE OF WHO OR WHAT IS HUMAN COMES UP IN THE LEGAL CONTEXT. ANYWAY, SO-CALLED HUMAN DECISIONS ARE HEAVILY INFLUENCED BY THE IMPLANTS. AND THE MACHINES DON'T IMPLEMENT SIGNIFICANT DECISIONS WITHOUT THEIR OWN REVIEW. BUT I SUPPOSE YOU'RE RIGHT; THERE ARE SOME BENEFITS TO BEING COUNTED.

How about using a Turing Test as a means of counting?

THAT WOULD NEVER DO. FIRST OF ALL, IT WOULDN'T BE MUCH OF A SCREEN. FURTHERMORE, YOU'D HAVE THE SAME PROBLEM AGAIN IN SELECTING A HUMAN JUDGE TO CONDUCT THE TURING TEST. AND YOU'D STILL HAVE THE COUNTING ISSUE. TAKE GEORGE, FOR EXAMPLE. HE'S GREAT AT IMPRESSIONS. USUALLY, RIGHT AFTER DINNER, HE'LL ENTERTAIN ME WITH SOME PERSONALITY HE'S CONCOCTED. HE COULD SUBMIT THOUSANDS OF PERSONALITIES IF HE WANTED TO.

Speaking of George, doesn't he want to be counted?

OH, I THINK HE SHOULD BE. HE'S SO MUCH WISER AND GENTLER THAN ANYONE ON THE COMMISSION. I GUESS THAT'S WHY I'VE WANTED TO EXPAND THE DEFINITION. GEORGE COULD MANAGE TO ESTABLISH THE REQUISITE IDENTITY ORIGIN IF HE WANTED TO. BUT HE REALLY DOESN'T CARE ABOUT IT.

He seems to care mostly about you.

HMMM. THAT COULD BE IT.

You sound a little frustrated with the commission.

WELL, I CAN UNDERSTAND THEIR NEED TO BE CAUTIOUS. I JUST FEEL THAT THEY'RE UNDULY INFLUENCED BY THE RY GROUPS.

The Luddites, I mean, Remember York . . .

EXACTLY. I AM SYMPATHETIC TO A LOT OF THE YORK CONCERNS. BUT LATELY THEY'VE TAKEN STRIDENT POSITIONS AGAINST NEURAL THEY'RE ALSO OPPOSED TO ANY OF THE NEURAL IMPLANTS, WHICH IS JUST TOO RIGID. THEY'RE ALSO OPPOSED TO ANY OF THE NEURAL SCANNING RESEARCH.

So they're influencing the census commission to keep a conservative definition of who can be counted as a human?

I'D SAY SO. THE COMMISSION DENIES IT, BUT THERE'S A GROWING CONSENSUS THAT THE YORK PEOPLE HAVE TOO MUCH OF A VOICE THERE. THE COMMISSION DIRECTOR'S BROTHER WAS ACTUALLY A MEMBER OF THE FLORENCE MANIFESTO BRIGADE.

Florence? Isn't that where they locked up Kaczynski?

THAT'S RIGHT-FLORENCE, COLORADO. THE FLORENCE MANIFESTO WAS SMUGGLED OUT BY ONE OF THE GUARDS BEFORE KACZYNSKI'S DEATH. IT'S BECOME A KIND OF BIBLE FOR THE MORE STRIDENT YORK FACTIONS.

These are violent groups?

GENERALLY, NO. VIOLENCE WOULD BE UTTERLY FUTILE. OCCASIONALLY THERE ARE VIOLENT LONERS, OR SMALL GROUPS, WHO CLAIM TO BE PART OF THE FM BRIGADE, BUT THERE'S NO EVIDENCE OF ANY BROAD CONSPIRACY.

So what's in the Florence Manifesto?

DESPITE IT HAVING BEEN WRITTEN ALL IN LONGHAND USING A PENCIL, IT WAS A RATHER ARTICULATE AND EFFECTIVE DOCUMENT, PARTICULARLY WITH REGARD TO THE NANO-PATHOGEN CONCERN.

So what is the concern with nanopathogens?

ACTUALLY, I JUST ATTENDED A CONFERENCE ON THAT.

You attended virtually?

THAT'S USUALLY THE WAY I ATTEND CONFERENCES NOWADAYS. ANYWAY, THE CONFERENCE SESSIONS OVERLAPPED THE COMMISSION MEETINGS, SO I HAD NO CHOICE.

You can attend more than one meeting at a time?

IT DOES GET A LITTLE CONFUSING. IT'S KIND OF POINTLESS, THOUGH, TO JUST SIT IN A LONG MEETING AND NOT DO SOMETHING USEFUL WITH YOUR TIME.

I agree. So, what was the view of the conference?

NOW THAT THE BIOPATHOGEN CONCERN IS ABATING—GIVEN THE NANOPATROL AND SCANNER TECHNOLOGIES, AND ALL—THERE IS MORE ATTENTION BEING PAID TO THE NANOPATHOGEN THREAT.

How serious is it?

IT HASN'T BEEN A BIG PROBLEM YET. THERE WAS A WORKSHOP ON A RECENT PHENOMENON OF NANOPATROLS THAT HAVE RESISTED THE COMMUNICATION PROTOCOLS, AND THAT DID SET OFF A FEW ALARMS. BUT THERE'S NOTHING LIKE YOU HAD IN 1999 WITH OVER 100,000 PEOPLE DYING EACH YEAR FROM ADVERSE REACTIONS TO PHARMACEUTICAL DRUGS. AND THAT'S WHEN THEY WERE PRESCRIBED AND TAKEN CORRECTLY.

And drugs in 2029?

DRUGS TODAY ARE GENETICALLY ENGINEERED SPECIFICALLY FOR THE INDIVIDUAL'S OWN DNA COMPOSITION. INTERESTINGLY, THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS THAT'S USED IS BASED ON THE PROTEIN-FOLDING WORK THAT WAS ORIGINALLY DESIGNED FOR THE NANOPATROLS. IN ANY EVENT, DRUGS ARE INDIVIDUALLY TAILORED AND TESTED IN A HOST SIMULATION BEFORE INTRODUCING ANY SIGNIFICANT VOLUME TO THE ACTUAL HOST'S BODY. SO ADVERSE REACTIONS ON A MEANINGFUL SCALE ARE QUITE RARE.

So there isn't much concern with nanopathogens?

OH, I WOULDN'T SAY THAT. THERE WAS QUITE A BIT OF CONCERN EXPRESSED ABOUT SOME OF THE RECENT SELF-REPLICATION RESEARCH. There should be.

BUT THE ENVIRONMENT RESTRUCTURING PROPOSALS SEEM TO REQUIRE IT.

Well, don't say I didn't warn you.

I'LL KEEP THAT IN MIND, NOT THAT I HAVE MUCH INFLUENCE ON THE ISSUE.

Your work is mostly on the census issue?

YEAH, FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS ANYWAY. I SPENT THREE YEARS BASICALLY GOING THROUGH THE COMMISSION'S STUDY GUIDE, SO I COULD BE QUALIFIED TO SIT IN ON THE COMMISSION MEETINGS, ALTHOUGH I STILL DON'T HAVE A VOTE.

So you had a three-year leave to study?

IT FELT LIKE I WAS BACK IN COLLEGE. AND LEARNING WAS JUST AS TEDIOUS AS IT WAS THEN.

Don't the neural implants help?

OH, SURE, THERE'S NO WAY I COULD HAVE GOTTEN THROUGH IT OTHERWISE. UNFORTUNATELY, I STILL CAN'T JUST DOWNLOAD THE MATERIAL, NOT THE WAY GEORGE CAN. THE IMPLANT PREPROCESSES THE INFORMATION, AND FEEDS ME THE PREPROCESSED KNOWLEDGE STRUCTURES QUICKLY. BUT IT'S OFTEN DISCOURAGING; IT JUST TAKES SO LONG. GEORGE HAS BEEN A BIG HELP, THOUGH. HE KIND OF WHISPERS TO ME WHEN I'M PUZZLED ABOUT SOMETHING.

So the three-year study leave is over now?

ABOUT A YEAR AGO, THE COMMISSION MEETINGS GOT PRETTY INTENSE, AND I'VE FOCUSED ON THAT. NOW WITH THE CENSUS ONLY A YEAR AWAY, WE'RE WORKING ON IMPLEMENTATION. SO ASIDE FROM THE LAWSUIT, THAT'S PRETTY MUCH IT.

Lawsuit?

OH, JUST A ROUTINE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY DISPUTE. MY PATENT ON AN ENHANCED EVOLUTIONARY PATTERN-RECOGNITION ALGORITHM FOR NANOPATROL DETECTION OF CELL IMBALANCES WAS ATTACKED WITH A PRIOR ART CITATION. I HAPPENED TO MENTION IN ONE OF THE DISCUSSION GROUPS THAT I THOUGHT SEVERAL OF THE PATENT CLAIMS WERE BEING INFRINGED, AND NEXT THING I KNEW I GOT HIT WITH A DECLARATORY JUDGMENT SUIT FROM THE NANOPATROL INDUSTRY.

I didn't know you did work on nanopatrols.

TO BE PERFECTLY HONEST, IT WAS GEORGE'S INVENTION, BUT HE NEEDED A RESPONSIBLE AGENT.

Since he has no standing.

IT'S TRUE, THERE ARE STILL SOME LIMITATIONS WHEN YOU CAN'T ESTABLISH YOUR HUMAN ORIGIN.

So how's this going to get resolved?

IT'S UP BEFORE THE MAGISTRATE NEXT MONTH.

It can be rather frustrating taking these technical issues to court.

OH, THIS MAGISTRATE KNOWS HIS STUFF. HE'S A RECOGNIZED EXPERT ON NANOPATROL PATTERN RECOGNITION.

Doesn't sound like the courts I know.

THE EXPANSION OF THE MAGISTRATE SYSTEM HAS BEEN A VERY POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT. IF WE WERE LIMITED TO JUST THE HUMAN JUDGES . . .

Oh, so the magistrate is . . .

A VIRTUAL INTELLIGENCE, YES.

So the machines do have some legal standing.

OFFICIALLY, THE VIRTUAL MAGISTRATES ARE AGENTS OF THE HUMAN JUDGE IN CHARGE OF THAT COURT, BUT THE MAGISTRATES MAKE MOST OF THE DECISIONS.

I see, sounds like these magistrates are pretty influential.

THERE'S REALLY NO CHOICE. THE ISSUES ARE JUST TOO COMPLICATED, AND THE PROCESS WOULD TAKE TOO LONG OTHERWISE.

I see. So, tell me about your son.

HE'S A SOPHOMORE AT STANFORD, AND HAVING A GREAT TIME.

They certainly have a beautiful campus.

YEAH, WE'VE BEEN LOOKING AT THE OVAL AND QUAD FOR A LONG TIME. JEREMY'S HAD THREE- DIMENSIONAL PROJECTIONS OF THE STANFORD CAMPUS ON THE PICTURE PORTALS FOR THE LAST TEN YEARS.

He must feel right at home then.

HE IS AT HOME. HE'S DOWNSTAIRS.

So he's attending virtually.

MOST STUDENTS DO. BUT STANFORD STILL HAS SOME ANACHRONISTIC RULES ABOUT SPENDING AT LEAST A WEEK EACH QUARTER ACTUALLY ON CAMPUS.

With your physical body?

EXACTLY, WHICH MAKES IT DIFFICULT FOR A VIRTUAL INTELLIGENCE TO ATTEND OFFICIALLY.

Not that they need to, since they can download knowledge directly from the Web.

IT'S NOT THE KNOWLEDGE BUT THE DISCUSSION GROUPS THAT WOULD BE OF INTEREST.

Can't anyone attend the discussion groups?

ONLY THE OPEN DISCUSSIONS. THERE ARE A LOT OF CLOSED DISCUSSION GROUPS Which are not on the Web?

OF COURSE THEY'RE ON THE WEB, BUT YOU NEED A KEY.

Right, so that's how Jeremy attends from home?

EXACTLY. JEREMY AND GEORGE HAVE GROWN QUITE CLOSE LATELY, SO JEREMY LETS GEORGE LISTEN IN TO THE CLOSED SESSIONS, BUT DON'T TELL ANYONE THAT.

My lips are sealed. I'll only tell my other readers.

WELL, THEY NEED TO KEEP IT CONFIDENTIAL AS WELL.

I'll pass that on.

I HOPE THAT WILL BE OKAY. ANYWAY, GEORGE IS HELPING JEREMY WITH HIS HOMEWORK RIGHT NOW I hope George doesn't do all of it for him.

OH, GEORGE WOULDN'T DO THAT. HE'S JUST BEING HELPFUL. HE HELPS ALL OF US. WE REALLY COULDN'T MANAGE OTHERWISE.

You know, I could use his help, too. He might help me meet this book deadline I have.

WELL, GEORGE IS CLEVER, BUT I'M AFRAID HE DOESN'T SEEM TO HAVE THAT POETIC-LICENSE TECHNOLOGY THAT ENABLES YOU TO TALK TO ME FROM THIRTY YEARS AWAY.

That's too bad.

BUT I'LL BE HAPPY TO HELP YOU OUT.

Yes, I know, you already have.
