---
book: "The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence"
author: "Ray Kurzweil"
part: "2099"
type: source
---

# 2099

We know what we are, but know not what we may become.

—William Shakespeare

Human thinking is merging with the world of machine intelligence that the human species initially created.

The reverse engineering of the human brain appears to be complete. The hundreds of specialized regions have been fully scanned, analyzed, and understood. Machine analogues are based on these human models, which have been enhanced and extended, along with many new massively parallel algorithms. These enhancements, combined with the enormous advantages in speed and capacity of electronic/photonic circuits, provide substantial advantages to machine-based intelligence.

Machine-based intelligences derived entirely from these extended models of human intelligence claim to be human, although their brains are not based on carbon-based cellular processes, but rather electronic and photonic "equivalents." Most of these intelligences are not tied to a specific computational-processing unit (that is, piece of hardware). The number of software-based humans vastly exceeds those still using native neuron-cell-based computation. A software-based intelligence is able to manifest bodies at will: one or more virtual bodies at different levels of virtual reality and nanoengineered physical bodies using instantly reconfigurable nanobot swarms.

Even among those human intelligences still using carbon-based neurons, there is ubiquitous use of neural implant technology, which provides enormous augmentation of human perceptual and cognitive abilities. Humans who do not utilize such implants are unable to meaningfully participate in dialogues with those who do. There are a multiplicity of ways in which these scenarios are combined. The concept of what is human has been significantly altered. The rights and powers of different manifestations of human and machine intelligence and their various combinations represent a primary political and philosophical issue, although the basic rights of machine-based intelligence have been settled.

There is a plethora of trends that we can already taste and feel in 2099 that will continue to accelerate in this coming twenty-second century, interacting with each other, and

YES, YES, AS NIELS BOHR LIKED TO SAY, "IT'S HARD TO PREDICT, ESPECIALLY THE FUTURE." SO WHY DON'T YOU JUST CONTINUE WITH MY OBSERVATIONS. THAT WILL BE EASIER AND LESS CONFUSING.

Perhaps that makes sense.

AFTER ALL, A HUNDRED YEARS IS A LONG TIME. AND THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY WAS LIKE TEN CENTURIES IN ONE.

We thought that was true for the twentieth century.

THE SPIRAL OF ACCELERATING RETURNS LIVES ON.

I'm not surprised. Anyway, you do look amazing.

YOU SAY THAT EVERY TIME WE MEET.

I mean you look twenty again, only more beautiful than at the start of the book.

I KNEW THAT'S HOW YOU'D WANT ME.

Great, now I'm going to be accused of preferring younger women.

I'M GLAD I'M IN 2099.

Thanks.

HEY, I CAN LOOK UGLY, TOO.

That's okay.

NO REALLY, I CAN LOOK UGLY WITHOUT CHANGING MY APPEARANCE. IT'S LIKE THAT WITTGENSTEIN QUOTE, "IMAGINE THIS BUTTERFLY EXACTLY AS IT IS, BUT UGLY INSTEAD OF BEAUTIFUL."

I was always a little confused by that quote, but I'm glad you're quoting twentieth-century thinkers.

WELL, YOU WOULDN'T BE FAMILIAR WITH THE TWENTY-FIRST-CENTURY ONES.

So you're expressing this appearance. But I don't have the ability to see virtual reality, so I don't UNDERSTAND HOW YOU CAN SEE ME?

Right.

MY BODY RIGHT NOW IS JUST A LITTLE FOG SWARM PROJECTION. NEAT, HUH?

Not bad, not bad at all. You feel pretty good, too.

I THOUGHT I'D GIVE YOU A HUG, I MEAN THE BOOK'S ALMOST OVER.

This is quite a technology.

OH, WE DON'T USE THE SWARMS SO OFTEN ANYMORE.

Last time I saw you, there were no nanobot swarms. Now you're mostly past using them. Guess I missed a phase there.

OH, ONE OR TWO. IT'S BEEN SEVENTY YEARS SINCE WE LAST SAW EACH OTHER! AND AN EVER ACCELERATING SEVENTY YEARS AT THAT.

We'll have to see each other more often.

I DON'T KNOW IF THAT WILL BE POSSIBLE. THE BOOK'S COMING TO AN END, AS YOU SAID.

So, are you and George still close?

OH, VERY CLOSE. WE'RE NEVER APART.

Never? Don't you get bored with each other?

DO YOU GET BORED WITH YOURSELF?

Actually, sometimes I do. But are you saying that you and George have, what's the word I'm looking for . . .

MERGED?

Hmmm. Is this like a corporate merger?

WELL, MORE LIKE A JOINING OF TWO SOCIETIES.

Two societies of mind?

EXACTLY. OUR MIND IS NOW JUST ONE BIG HAPPY SOCIETY.

The female spider devouring the little male spider?

OH NO, GEORGE IS THE BIG SPIDER. HIS MIND WAS LIKE . . .

A galaxy?

ALL RIGHT, LET'S NOT GET CARRIED AWAY, MAYBE LIKE A BIG SOLAR SYSTEM.

So you've joined societies, or, uh, joined your societies. So you can't make love to each other anymore?

THAT DOESN'T FOLLOW AT ALL.

Okay, I guess some things are beyond my 1999 comprehension.

THAT DOESN'T FOLLOW EITHER. THE PROFOUND THING ABOUT HUMAN BEINGS—EVEN MOSHs—IS THAT ALMOST NOTHING IS TRULY BEYOND YOUR COMPREHENSION. THAT JUST WASN'T TRUE OF THE OTHER PRIMATES.

Okay, my questions are getting queued up now. MOSHs?

OH, MOSTLY ORIGINAL SUBSTRATE HUMANS.

Yes, of course—unenhanced . . .

EXACTLY.

But how can you be intimate with George now that you've joined forces, so to speak?

WELL, AS BARRY SPACKS'S POEM—

You mean "Made double by his lust, he sounds a woman's groans . . .

RIGHT, I MEAN EVEN MOSHs SPLIT THEMSELVES—

### When we're by ourselves—

OR WITH ANOTHER. THAT'S REALLY THE ULTIMATE, DON'T YOU THINK, TO BECOME THE OTHER PERSON AND YOURSELF AT THE SAME TIME.

Especially when the other person is already part of yourself.

SURE. BUT GEORGE AND I CAN STILL SPLIT OURSELVES, AT LEAST OUR OUTER LAYERS.

Layers?

OKAY, WELL MAYBE SOME THINGS ARE HARD TO EXPLAIN TO A MOSH, EVEN A NICE ONE LIKE YOURSELF.

Yeah, a MOSH that created you, don't forget.

OH, I'LL NEVER FORGET. I'LL BE GRATEFUL FOREVER. YOU CAN THINK OF THE OUTER LAYERS AS OUR PERSONALITIES.

So, you separate your personalities . . .

AT TIMES. BUT WE STILL SHARE OUR KNOWLEDGE STORES AT ALL TIMES.

Sounds like the two of you have a lot in common.

[GIGGLES]

I see you still have your old personality.

OF COURSE I'VE KEPT MY OLD PERSONALITY. IT HAS A LOT OF SENTIMENTAL VALUE TO ME.

I see, so you have others?

YEAH, MY FAVORITES ARE A FEW THAT GEORGE CAME UP WITH.

Creative guy.

OH YES.

Well, having multiple personalities is not all that special. We've had people like that in the twentieth century, too.

SURE, I REMEMBER. BUT THERE WASN'T ENOUGH THINKING TO GO AROUND FOR ALL THOSE PERSONALITIES WHEN THEY'RE STUCK IN JUST ONE MOSH BRAIN. SO IT WAS DIFFICULT FOR ALL OF THOSE PERSONALITIES TO SUCCEED IN LIFE.

So what are you doing right now?

I'M TALKING TO YOU.

Yes, I know, but what else are you doing?

REALLY NOT MUCH. I'M TRYING TO PAY MOST OF MY ATTENTION TO YOU.

Not much? So you are doing something else.

I REALLY CAN'T THINK OF ANYTHING.

Well, are you relating to someone else at the moment?

YOU'RE PRETTY NOSY.

We've already established that decades ago. But that doesn't answer the question.

WELL, NOT REALLY.

Not really? So you are.

ALL RIGHT, ASIDE FROM GEORGE, NOT REALLY.

I'm glad I'm not distracting you too much. Okay, what else?

JUST FINISHING UP THIS SYMPHONY.

Is this a new interest?

I'M REALLY JUST DABBLING, BUT CREATING MUSIC IS A GREAT WAY FOR ME TO STAY CLOSE WITH JEREMY AND EMILY.

Creating music sounds like a good thing to do with your kids, even if they are almost ninety years old. So, can I hear it?

I'M AFRAID YOU WOULDN'T UNDERSTAND IT.

So it requires enhancement to understand?

YES, MOST ART DOES. FOR STARTERS, THIS SYMPHONY IS IN FREQUENCIES THAT A MOSH CAN'T HEAR, AND HAS MUCH TOO FAST A TEMPO. AND IT USES MUSICAL STRUCTURES THAT A MOSH COULD NEVER FOLLOW.

Can't you create art for nonaugmented humans? I mean there's still a lot of depth possible. Consider Beethoven—he wrote almost two centuries ago, and we still find his music exhilarating.

YES, THERE'S A GENRE OF MUSIC—ALL THE ARTS ACTUALLY WHERE WE CREATE MUSIC AND ART THAT A MOSH IS CAPABLE OF UNDERSTANDING.

And then you play MOSH music for MOSHs?

HMMM, NOW THERE'S AN INTERESTING IDEA. I SUPPOSE WE COULD TRY THAT, ALTHOUGH MOSHs ARE NOT THAT EASY TO FIND ANYMORE. IT'S REALLY NOT NECESSARY, THOUGH. WE CAN CERTAINLY UNDERSTAND WHAT A MOSH IS CAPABLE OF UNDERSTANDING. THE POINT, THOUGH, IS TO USE THE MOSH LIMITATIONS AS AN ADDED CONSTRAINT.

Sort of like composing new music for old instruments.

YEAH, NEW MUSIC FOR OLD MINDS.

Okay, so aside from your, uh, dialogue with George, and this symphony, I have your complete attention?

WELL, Now GEORGE AND I ARE SHARING A HAMBURGER FOR LUNCH.

I thought you were a vegetarian.

IT'S NOT A HAMBURGER FROM A COW, SILLY.

Of course, a swarm hamburger.

NO, NO, YOU'RE GETTING A LITTLE CONFUSED. WE DID HAVE NANOPRODUCED FOOD ABOUT HALF A CENTURY AGO. SO WE COULD EAT MEAT, OR ANYTHING WE WANTED, BUT IT DIDN'T COME FROM ANIMALS, AND IT HAD THE RIGHT NUTRITIONAL COMPOSITION. BUT EVEN THEN, YOU REALLY WOULDN'T WANT TO EAT A SWARM PROJECTION—SWARMS ARE JUST FOR VISUAL-AUDITORY-TACTILE PROJECTIONS IN REAL REALITY. YOU'RE FOLLOWING ME?

Uh, sure.

WELL, A COUPLE OF DECADES LATER, OUR BODIES WERE BASICALLY REPLACED WITH NANOCONSTRUCTED ORGANS. SO WE DIDN'T NEED TO EAT ANYMORE IN REAL REALITY. BUT WE STILL ENJOYED SHARING A MEAL IN VIRTUAL REALITY. ANYWAY, THE NANOCON-STRUCTED BODIES WERE PRETTY INFLEXIBLE. I MEAN, IT TOOK SECONDS TO RECONSTRUCT THEM INTO ANOTHER FORM. SO TODAY, WHEN NECESSARY, OR DESIRABLE, WE JUST PROJECT AN APPROPRIATE BODY.

Using the nanobot swarms?

THAT'S ONE WAY OF DOING IT. THAT'S WHAT I'M DOING WITH YOU NOW.

Since I'm a MOSH.

RIGHT, BUT IN MOST OTHER CIRCUMSTANCES, I JUST USE AN AVAILABLE VIRTUAL CHANNEL.

Okay, I think I'm following you now.

LIKE I SAID, MOSHs CAN UNDERSTAND ALMOST ANYTHING. WE DO HAVE A LOT OF RESPECT FOR MOSHs.

It's your heritage, after all.

RIGHT, AND ANYWAY, WE'RE REQUIRED TO, SINCE THE GRANDFATHER LEGISLATION.

Okay, let me guess. MOSHs were protected by grandfathering native minds.

YES, BUT NOT ONLY MOSHs. IT'S REALLY A PROGRAM TO PROTECT OUR WHOLE BIRTH-RIGHT, A REVERENCE FOR WHERE WE'VE BEEN.

So you still like to eat?

SURE. SINCE WE'RE BASED ON OUR MOSH HERITAGE, OUR EXPERIENCES—EATING, MUSIC, SEXUALITY— HAVE THE OLD FOUNDATION, ALBEIT VASTLY EXPANDED. HOWEVER, WE DO HAVE A WIDE RANGE OF CURRENT EXPERIENCES THAT ARE DIFFICULT TO TRACE, ALTHOUGH THE ANTHROPOLOGISTS KEEP TRYING.

I'm still surprised that you'd be interested in eating a hamburger.

IT'S A THROWBACK, I KNOW A LOT OF OUR ACTS AND THOUGHTS ARE ROOTED IN THE PAST. BUT NOW THAT YOU MENTION IT, I THINK I'VE LOST MY APPETITE.

Sorry about that.

YEAH, WELL, I SHOULD BE MORE SENSITIVE. SHELBY, A GOOD FRIEND OF MINE, LOOKS LIKE A COW, AT LEAST THAT'S HOW SHE ALWAYS MANIFESTS HERSELF. SHE CLAIMS THAT SHE WAS A COW BROUGHT OVER TO THE OTHER SIDE AND ENHANCED. BUT NO ONE BELIEVES HER.

So how satisfying is it to eat a virtual hamburger in virtual reality?

IT'S VERY SATISFYING—THE TEXTURE, TASTE, AROMA IS WONDERFUL—JUST HOW I REMEMBER IT, EVEN IF I WAS A VEGETARIAN MOST OF THE TIME. THE NEURAL MODELS NOT ONLY SIMULATE OUR VISUAL, AUDITORY, AND TACTILE ENVIRONMENTS, BUT OUR INTERNAL ENVIRONMENTS AS WELL.

Including digestion?

YES, THE MODEL OF BIOCHEMICAL DIGESTION IS QUITE ACCURATE.

How about indigestion?

WE DO SEEM TO MANAGE TO AVOID THAT.

You're missing something there.

HMMM.

Okay, you were an attractive young woman when I first met you. And you still project yourself as a beautiful young woman. At least when I'm with you.

THANKS.

So, are you saying that you're a machine now?

A MACHINE? THAT'S REALLY NOT FOR ME TO SAY. IT'S LIKE ASKING ME IF I'M BRILLIANT OR INSPIRING.

I guess the word machine in 2099 doesn't have quite the same connotations that it has here in 1999.

THAT'S HARD FOR ME TO RECALL NOW.

Okay, let's put it this way. Do you still have any carbon-based neural circuits?

CIRCUITS, I'M NOT SURE I UNDERSTAND. YOU MEAN MY OWN CIRCUITS?

Gee, I guess a lot of time has gone by.

ALL RIGHT, LOOK, WE DID HAVE OUR OWN MENTAL MEDIUM FOR A FEW DECADES, AND THERE ARE STILL LOCAL INTELLIGENCES THAT LIKE TO STICK TO A SPECIFIC COMPUTATIONAL UNIT. BUT THAT'S A REFLECTION OF SOME OLD ATTACHMENT ANXIETY. THESE LOCAL INTELLIGENCES DO MOST OF THEIR THINKING OUT ON THE WEB ANYWAY, SO IT'S JUST A SENTIMENTAL ANACHRONISM.

An anachronism, like having your own body?

I CAN HAVE MY OWN BODY ANYTIME I WANT.

But you don't have a specific neural substrate?

WHY WOULD I WANT THAT? IT'S JUST A LOT OF MAINTENANCE, AND SO LIMITING.

So, at some point, Molly's neural circuits were scanned?

YEAH, ME, MOLLY. AND IT DIDN'T HAPPEN ALL AT ONCE, BY THE WAY.

But don't you wonder if you're the same person?

OF COURSE I AM. I CAN CLEARLY REMEMBER MY EXPERIENCES BEFORE WE STARTED SCANNING MY MIND, DURING THE DECADE THAT PORTIONS WERE REINSTANTIATED, AND SINCE.

Sure, you've inherited all of Molly's memories.

OH NO, NOT THIS ISSUE AGAIN.

I don't mean to challenge you. But just consider that Molly's neural scan was instantiated in a copy which became you. Molly might still have continued to exist and may have evolved off in some other direction.

WE JUST DON'T THINK THAT'S A VALID PERSPECTIVE. WE SETTLED THAT ISSUE AT LEAST TWENTY YEARS AGO.

Well, of course you feel that way now. You're on the other side.

WELL, EVERYONE IS.

Everyone?

OKAY, NOT QUITE EVERYONE. BUT THERE IS NO DOUBT IN MY MIND THAT—

You're Molly

I THINK I KNOW WHO I AM.

Well, I have no problem with you as Molly.

You MOSHs ALWAYS WERE A PUSHOVER.

It is hard to compete with you folks on the other side.

SURE IT IS. THAT'S WHY MOST OF US ARE OVER HERE.

I'm not sure I can push the identity issue much further.

THAT'S ONE REASON IT'S NO LONGER AN ISSUE.

So why don't we talk about your work. Are you still consulting for the census commission?

WAS INVOLVED IN THAT FOR HALF A CENTURY, BUT I GOT KIND OF BURNED OUT ON IT. ANYWAY, THE ISSUE NOW IS MOSTLY IMPLEMENTATION.

So the issue of how to count is resolved?

WE DON'T COUNT PEOPLE ANYMORE. IT BECAME CLEAR THAT COUNTING INDIVIDUAL PERSONS WASN'T TOO MEANINGFUL. AS IRIS MURDOCH SAID, "IT'S HARD TO TELL WHERE ONE PERSON ENDS AND ANOTHER BEGINS."

IT'S RATHER LIKE TRYING TO COUNT IDEAS OR THOUGHTS.

So what do you count?

OBVIOUSLY, WE COUNT COMPUTES.

You mean, like calculations per second.

HMMM, IT'S A LITTLE MORE COMPLICATED THAN THAT, BECAUSE OF THE QUANTUM COMPUTING.

I didn't expect it to be simple. But what's the bottom line?

WELL, WITHOUT QUANTUM COMPUTING, WE'RE UP TO ABOUT 1055 CALCULATIONS PER SECOND. [1]

Per person?

NO, WE EACH GET WHATEVER COMPUTATION WE WANT. THAT'S THE TOTAL FIGURE.

For the whole planet?

SORT OF. I MEAN NOT ALL OF IT IS LITERALLY ON THE PLANET.

And with quantum computing?

WELL, ABOUT 1042 OF THE COMPUTATIONS ARE QUANTUM COMPUTATIONS, WITH ABOUT 1,000 QU-BITS BEING TYPICAL. SO THAT'S EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 10342 CALCULATIONS PER SECOND, BUT THE QUANTUM COMPUTATIONS ARE NOT ENTIRELY GENERAL PURPOSE, SO THE 1055 FIGURE IS STILL

### RELEVANT. [2]

Hmmm, I've only got about 1016 cps in my MOSH brain, at least on a good day.

TURNS OUT THERE IS SOME QUANTUM COMPUTING IN YOUR MOSH BRAIN, SO IT'S HIGHER.

That's reassuring. So if you're not working on the census, what are you up to?

WE DON'T HAVE JOBS EXACTLY.

I know what that's like.

ACTUALLY, YOU'RE NOT A BAD MODEL FOR WORK IN THE LATE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY. WE'RE ALL BASICALLY ENTREPRENEURS.

Sounds like some things have moved in the right direction. So what are some of your enterprises?

ONE IDEA I HAVE IS A UNIQUE WAY OF CATALOGING NEW TECHNOLOGY PROPOSALS. IT'S A MATTER OF MATCHING THE USER'S KNOWLEDGE STRUCTURES TO THE EXTERNAL WEB KNOWLEDGE, AND THEN INTEGRATING THE RELEVANT PATTERNS.

I'm not sure I followed that. But give me an example of a recent research proposal that you've cataloged.

MOST OF THE CATALOGING IS AUTOMATIC. BUT I DID GET INVOLVED IN TRYING TO QUALIFY SOME OF THE RECENT FEMTOENGINEERING PROPOSALS. [3]

Femto, as in one thousandth of a trillionth of a meter?

EXACTLY. DREXLER HAS WRITTEN A SERIES OF PAPERS SHOWING THE FEASIBILITY OF BUILDING TECHNOLOGY ON THE FEMTOMETER SCALE, BASICALLY EXPLOITING FINE STRUCTURES WITHIN QUARKS TO DO COMPUTING.

Has anyone done this?

NO ONE HAS DEMONSTRATED IT, BUT THE DREXLER PAPERS APPEAR TO SHOW THAT IT'S PRACTICAL. AT LEAST THAT'S MY VIEW, BUT IT'S PRETTY CONTROVERSIAL.

This is the same Drexler who developed the nanotechnology concept in the 1970s and 1980s?

YEAH, ERIC DREXLER.

That makes him around 150, so he must be on the other side.

OF COURSE, ANYONE DOING SERIOUS WORK HAS TO BE ON THE OTHER SIDE.

You mentioned papers. You still have papers?

YES, WELL SOME ARCHAIC TERMS HAVE STUCK. WE CALL THEM MOSHISMS. PAPERS ARE CERTAINLY NOT RENDERED ON ANY PHYSICAL SUBSTANCE. BUT WE STILL CALL THEM PAPERS.

What language are they written in, English?

UNIVERSITY PAPERS ARE GENERALLY PUBLISHED USING A STANDARD SET OF ASSIMILATED KNOWLEDGE PROTOCOLS, WHICH CAN BE INSTANTLY UNDERSTOOD. SOME REDUCED STRUCTURE FORMS HAVE ALSO EMERGED, BUT THOSE ARE GENERALLY USED IN MORE POPULAR PUBLICATIONS.

You mean, like the National Enquirer?

THAT'S A PRETTY SERIOUS PUBLICATION. THEY USE THE FULL PROTOCOL.

I see.

SOMETIMES, PAPERS ARE ALSO RENDERED IN RULE-BASED FORMS, BUT THESE ARE USUALLY NOT SATISFACTORY. THERE IS A QUAINT TREND OF POPULAR PUBLICATIONS PUBLISHING ARTICLES IN MOSH LANGUAGES SUCH AS ENGLISH, BUT WE CAN TRANSLATE THESE INTO ASSIMILATED KNOWLEDGE STRUCTURES RATHER QUICKLY. LEARNING IS NOT THE STRUGGLE IT ONCE WAS. NOW THE STRUGGLE IS DISCOVERING NEW KNOWLEDGE TO LEARN.

Any other recent trends that you've gotten involved in?

WELL, THE AUTOMATIC CATALOGING AGENTS HAD DIFFICULTY WITH THE SUICIDE-MOVEMENT PROPOSALS.

Which are?

THE IDEA IS TO HAVE THE RIGHT TO TERMINATE YOUR MIND FILE AS WELL AS TO DESTROY ALL COPIES. REGULATIONS REQUIRE KEEPING AT LEAST THREE BACKUP COPIES OF NO MORE THAN TEN MINUTES' VINTAGE, WITH AT LEAST ONE OF THESE COPIES IN THE CONTROL OF THE AUTHORITIES.

I can see the problem. Now if you were told that all copies were going to be destroyed, they could secretly keep a copy and instantiate it at a later time. You'd never know. Doesn't that contradict the premise that those on the other side are the same person—the same continuity of consciousness—as the original person?

I DON'T THINK THAT FOLLOWS AT ALL.

Can you explain that?

YOU WOULDN'T UNDERSTAND.

I thought I could understand most anything.

I DID SAY THAT. I GUESS I'LL HAVE TO GIVE THAT MORE THOUGHT.

You'll have to give more thought to whether a MOSH can understand any concept, or the consciousness-continuation issue?

I GUESS NOW I'M CONFUSED.

All right, well, tell me more about this "destroy all copies" movement.

WELL, I REALLY CAN SEE BOTH SIDES OF THE ISSUE. ON THE ONE HAND, I'VE ALWAYS SYMPATHIZED WITH THE RIGHT TO CONTROL ONE'S OWN DESTINY. ON THE OTHER HAND, IT'S SIN TO DESTROY KNOWLEDGE.

And the copies represent knowledge?

WHY SURE. LATELY, THE DESTROY-ALL-COPIES MOVEMENT HAS BEEN THE PRIMARY YORK ISSUE.

Now wait a second. If I recall correctly, the Yorks are antitechnologists, yet only those of you on the other side would be concerned about the destroy-all-copies issue. If Yorks are on the other side, how can they be against technology? Or if they're not on the other side, then why would they care about this issue?

OKAY, REMEMBER IT'S BEEN SEVENTY YEARS SINCE WE'VE TALKED. THE YORK GROUPS DO HAVE THEIR ROOTS IN THE OLD ANTITECHNOLOGY MOVEMENTS, BUT NOW THAT THEY'RE ON THE OTHER SIDE, THEY'VE DRIFTED TO A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT ISSUE, SPECIFICALLY INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM. THE FLORENCE MANIFESTO PEOPLE, ON THE OTHER HAND, HAVE KEPT A COMMITMENT TO REMAINING MOSHs, WHICH, OF COURSE, I RESPECT.

Thank you. And they're protected by the grandfather legislation?

INDEED. I HEARD A PRESENTATION BY AN FM DISCUSSION LEADER THE OTHER DAY, AND WHILE SHE WAS SPEAKING IN A MOSH LANGUAGE, THERE WAS JUST NO WAY THAT SHE DOESN'T HAVE AT LEAST A NEURAL EXPANSION IMPLANT.

Well, us MOSHs can make sense from time to time.

OH, OF COURSE. I DIDN'T MEAN TO IMPLY OTHERWISE, I MEAN . . .

That's okay. So are you involved in this destroy-all-copies movement?

JUST IN CATALOGING SOME OF THE PROPOSALS AND DISCUSSIONS. BUT I DID GET INVOLVED IN A RELATED MOVEMENT TO BLOCK LEGAL DISCOVERY OF THE BACKUP DATA.

That sounds important. But what about discovery of the mind file itself? I mean, all of your thinking and memory is right there in digital form.

ACTUALLY, IT'S BOTH DIGITAL AND ANALOG, BUT YOUR POINT IS WELL TAKEN.

So . . .

THERE HAVE BEEN RULINGS ON LEGAL DISCOVERY OF THE MIND FILE. BASICALLY, OUR KNOWLEDGE STRUCTURES THAT CORRESPOND TO WHAT USED TO CONSTITUTE DISCOVERABLE DOCUMENTS AND ARTIFACTS ARE DISCOVERABLE. THOSE STRUCTURES AND PATTERNS THAT CORRESPOND TO OUR THINKING PROCESS ARE NOT SUPPOSED TO BE. AGAIN, THIS IS ALL ROOTED IN OUR MOSH PAST. BUT AS YOU CAN IMAGINE, THERE'S ENDLESS LITIGATION ON HOW TO INTERPRET THIS.

So legal discovery of your primary mind file is resolved, albeit with some ambiguous rules. And the backup files?

BELIEVE IT OR NOT, THE BACKUP ISSUE IS NOT ENTIRELY RESOLVED. DOESN'T MAKE A LOT OF SENSE, DOES IT?

The legal system was never entirely consistent. What about testimony—do you have to be physically present?

SINCE MANY OF US DON'T HAVE A PERMANENT PHYSICAL PRESENCE, THAT WOULDN'T MAKE MUCH SENSE, NOW WOULD IT.

I see, so you can give testimony with a virtual body?

SURE, BUT YOU CAN'T BE DOING ANYTHING ELSE WHILE TESTIFYING.

No asides with George, then.

RIGHT.

That sounds about right. Here in 1999, you can't bring coffee into a courtroom and you have to turn off your cell phone.

ASIDE FROM DISCOVERY, THERE'S A LOT OF CONCERN THAT GOVERNMENT INVESTIGATORY AGENCIES CAN ACCESS THE BACKUPS, ALTHOUGH THEY DENY IT.

I'm not surprised that privacy is still an issue. Phil Zimmerman . . .

THE PGP GUY?

Oh, you remember him?

SURE, A LOT OF PEOPLE CONSIDER HIM A SAINT.

His "Pretty Good Privacy" is indeed pretty good—it's the leading encryption algorithm circa 1999. Anyway, he said that "in the future, we'll all have fifteen minutes of privacy."

FIFTEEN MINUTES WOULD BE GREAT.

Okay. Now what about the self-replicating nanobots you were concerned about in 2029?

WE STRUGGLED WITH THAT FOR SEVERAL DECADES, AND THERE WERE A NUMBER OF SERIOUS INCIDENTS. BUT WE'RE PRETTY MUCH PAST THAT NOW SINCE WE DON'T PERMANENTLY MANIFEST OUR BODIES ANYMORE. AS LONG AS THE WEB IS SECURE, THEN WE HAVE NOTHING TO WORRY ABOUT.

Now that you exist as software, there must be concern again with software viruses.

THAT'S PRETTY INSIGHTFUL. SOFTWARE PATHOGENS COMPRISE THE PRIMARY CONCERN OF THE SECURITY AGENCIES. THEY'RE SAYING THAT THE VIRUS SCANS ACTUALLY CONSUME MORE THAN HALF OF THE COMPUTATION ON THE WEB.

Just to look for virus matches.

VIRUS SCANS INVOLVE A LOT MORE THAN JUST MATCHING PATHOGEN CODES. THE SMARTER SOFTWARE PATHOGENS ARE CONSTANTLY TRANSFORMING THEMSELVES. THERE ARE NO LAYERS TO RELIABLY MATCH ON.

Sounds tricky.

WE CERTAINLY DO HAVE TO BE CONSTANTLY ON GUARD AS WE MANAGE THE FLOW OF OUR THOUGHTS ACROSS THE SUBSTRATE CHANNELS.

What about security of the hardware?

YOU MEAN THE WEB?

That's where you exist, isn't it7

SURE. THE WEB IS VERY SECURE BECAUSE IT'S EXTREMELY DECENTRALIZED AND REDUNDANT. AT LEAST, THAT'S WHAT WE'RE TOLD. LARGE PORTIONS OF IT COULD BE DESTROYED WITH ESSENTIALLY NO EFFECT.

There must be an ongoing effort to maintain it as well.

THE WEB HARDWARE IS SELF-REPLICATING NOW, AND IS CONTINUALLY EXPANDING. THE OLDER CIRCUITS ARE CONTINUALLY RECYCLED AND REDESIGNED.

So there's no concern with its security?

I SUPPOSE I DO HAVE SOME SENSE OF ANXIETY ABOUT THE SUBSTRATE. I'VE ALWAYS ASSUMED THAT THIS FREE-FLOATING, ANXIOUS FEELING WAS JUST ROOTED IN MY MOSH PAST. BUT IT'S REALLY NOT A PROBLEM. I CAN'T IMAGINE THAT THE WEB COULD BE VULNERABLE.

What about from self-replicating nanopathogens?

HMMM, I SUPPOSE THAT COULD BE A DANGER, BUT THE NANOBOT PLAGUE WOULD HAVE TO BE

AWFULLY EXTENSIVE TO REACH ALL OF THE SUBSTRATE. I WONDER IF SOMETHING LIKE THAT HAPPENED FIFTEEN YEARS AGO WHEN 90 PERCENT OF THE WEB CAPACITY DISAPPEARED—WE NEVER DID GET AN ADEQUATE EXPLANATION OF THAT.

Well, I didn't mean to raise your anxieties. So all this cataloging work, you do that as an entrepreneur?

YEAH, KIND OF MY OWN LITTLE BUSINESS.

How's it going financially?

I'M GETTING BY, BUT I'VE NEVER HAD A LOT OF MONEY.

Well, give me some idea, what's your net worth roughly?

OH, NOT EVEN A BILLION DOLLARS.

That's in 2099 dollars?

SURE.

Okay, so what's that in 1999 dollars?

LET'S SEE, IN 1999 DOLLARS, THAT WOULD BE $149 BILLION AND CHANGE.

Oh, so dollars are worth more in 2099 than in 1999?

SURE, THE DEFLATION HAS BEEN PICKING UP.

I see. So you're richer than Bill Gates.

YEAH, WELL, RICHER THAN GATES WAS IN 1999. BUT THAT'S NOT SAYING MUCH. BUT HE'S STILL THE RICHEST MAN IN THE WORLD IN 2099.

I thought he said he was going to spend the first half of his life making money and the second half giving it away?

I THINK HE'S STILL ON THAT SAME PLAN. BUT HE HAS GIVEN AWAY A LOT OF MONEY.

So, what are you, about average, in terms of net worth?

NO, PROBABLY MORE LIKE EIGHTIETH PERCENTILE.

That's not bad, I always thought you were a smart cookie.

WELL, GEORGE HELPS.

And don't forget who thought you up.

OF COURSE.

So do you have enough financial wherewithal to meet your needs?

NEEDS?

Yeah, you're familiar with the concept . . .

HMMM, THAT IS A RATHER QUAINT IDEA. IT'S BEEN A FEW DECADES SINCE I'VE THOUGHT ABOUT NEEDS. ALTHOUGH I READ A BOOK ABOUT THAT RECENTLY.

A book, you mean with words?

NO, OF COURSE NOT, NOT UNLESS WE'RE DOING SOME RESEARCH ON EARLIER CENTURIES.

So this is like the research papers—books of assimilated knowledge structures?

THAT'S A REASONABLE WAY TO PUT IT. SEE, I SAID THERE WAS NOTHING A MOSH COULDN'T UNDERSTAND.

Thanks.

BUT WE DO DISTINGUISH PAPERS FROM BOOKS.

Books are longer?

NO, MORE INTELLIGENT. A PAPER IS BASICALLY A STATIC STRUCTURE. A BOOK IS INTELLIGENT. YOU CAN HAVE A RELATIONSHIP WITH A BOOK. BOOKS CAN HAVE EXPERIENCES WITH EACH OTHER.

Reminds me of Marvin Minsky's statement, "Can you imagine that they used to have libraries where the books didn't talk to each other?"

IT IS HARD TO RECALL THAT THAT USED TO BE TRUE.

Okay, so you don't have any unsatisfied needs. How about desires?

YES, NOW THAT'S A CONCEPT I CAN RELATE TO. MY FINANCIAL MEANS ARE CERTAINLY RATHER LIMITING. THERE ARE ALWAYS SUCH DIFFICULT BUDGET TRADE-OFFS TO BE MADE.

I guess some things haven't changed.

RIGHT. I MEAN LAST YEAR, THERE WERE OVER FIVE THOUSAND VENTURE PROPOSALS I DEARLY WANTED TO INVEST IN, BUT I COULD BARELY DO A THIRD OF THEM.

I guess you're no Bill Gates.

THAT'S FOR SURE.

When you make an investment, what does it pay for? I mean, you don't need to buy office supplies.

BASICALLY FOR PEOPLE'S TIME AND THOUGHTS, AND FOR KNOWLEDGE. ALSO, WHILE THERE IS A GREAT DEAL OF FREELY DISTRIBUTED KNOWLEDGE ON THE WEB, WE HAVE TO PAY ACCESS FEES FOR A LOT OF IT.

That doesn't sound too different from 1999.

MONEY IS CERTAINLY USEFUL.

So you've been around for a long time now. Does that ever bother you?

As WOODY ALLEN SAID, "SOME PEOPLE WANT TO ACHIEVE IMMORTALITY THROUGH THEIR WORK OR THEIR DESCENDANTS. I INTEND TO ACHIEVE IMMORTALITY BY NOT DYING."

I'm glad to see that Allen is still influential.

BUT I DO HAVE THIS RECURRENT DREAM.

You still dream?

OF COURSE I DO. I COULDN'T BE CREATIVE IF I DIDN'T DREAM. I TRY TO DREAM AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE. I HAVE AT LEAST ONE OR TWO DREAMS GOING AT ALL TIMES.

And the dream?

THERE'S A LONG ROW OF BUILDINGS—MILLIONS OF BUILDINGS. I GO INTO ONE, AND IT'S EMPTY. I CHECK OUT ALL THE ROOMS, AND THERE'S NO ONE THERE, NO FURNITURE, NOTHING. I LEAVE AND GO ON TO THE NEXT BUILDING. I GO FROM BUILDING TO BUILDING, AND THEN SUDDENLY THE DREAM ENDS WITH THIS FEELING OF DREAD . . .

Kind of a glimpse of despair at the apparently endless nature of time?

HMMM, MAYBE, BUT THEN THE FEELING GOES AWAY, AND I FIND THAT I CAN'T THINK ABOUT THE DREAM. IT JUST SEEMS TO VANISH.

Sounds like some sort of antidepression algorithm kicking in.

MAYBE I SHOULD LOOK INTO OVERRIDING IT?

The dream or the algorithm?

I WAS THINKING OF THE LATTER.

That might be hard to do.

ALAS.

So are you thinking about anything else at the moment?

I AM TRYING TO MEDITATE.

Along with the symphony, Jeremy, Emily, George, our conversation, and your one or two dreams?

HEY, THAT'S REALLY NOT VERY MUCH. YOU HAVE ALMOST ALL OF MY ATTENTION. I SUPPOSE THERE'S NOTHING ELSE GOING ON IN YOUR MIND AT THE MOMENT?

Okay, you're right. There is a lot going on in my mind, not that I can make heads or tails of most of it.

OKAY, THERE YOU ARE.

So how's your meditation going?

I GUESS I'M A LITTLE DISTRACTED WITH OUR DIALOGUE. IT'S NOT EVERY DAY THAT GET TO TALK TO SOMEONE FROM 1999.

How about in general?

MY MEDITATION? IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO ME. THERE'S SO MUCH GOING ON IN MY LIFE NOW. IT'S IMPORTANT FROM TIME TO TIME TO JUST LET THE THOUGHTS WASH OVER ME.

Does the meditation help you to transcend?

SOMETIMES I FEEL LIKE I CAN TRANSCEND, AND GET TO A POINT OF PEACE AND SERENITY, BUT IT'S NO EASIER NOW THAN IT WAS WHEN I FIRST MET YOU.

What about those neurological correlates of spiritual experience?

THERE ARE SOME SUPERFICIAL FEELINGS I CAN INSTILL IN MYSELF, BUT THAT'S NOT REAL SPIRITUALITY. IT'S LIKE ANY AUTHENTIC GESTURE—AN ARTFUL EXPRESSION, A MOMENT OF SERENITY, A SENSE OF FRIENDSHIP—THAT'S WHAT I LIVE FOR, AND THOSE MOMENTS ARE NOT EASY TO ACHIEVE.

I guess I'm glad to hear some things still aren't easy.

LIFE IS QUITE HARD, ACTUALLY. THERE ARE JUST SO MANY DEMANDS AND EXPECTATIONS MADE OF ME. AND I HAVE SO MANY LIMITATIONS.

One limitation I can think of is that we're running out of space in this book.

AND TIME.

That too. I do deeply appreciate your sharing your reflections with me.

I'M APPRECIATIVE, TOO. I WOULDN'T HAVE EXISTED WITHOUT YOU.

I hope the rest of you on the other side remember that as well.

I'LL SPREAD THE WORD.

Maybe we should kiss goodbye?

JUST A KISS?

We'll leave it at that for this book. I'll reconsider the ending for the movie, particularly if I get to play myself.

HERE'S MY KISS. . . . NOW REMEMBER, I'M READY TO DO ANYTHING OR BE ANYTHING YOU WANT OR NEED.

I'll keep that in mind.

YES, THAT'S WHERE YOU'LL FIND ME.

Too bad I have to wait a century to meet you.

OR TO BE ME.

Yes, that too.
