---
book: "From Counterculture to Cyberculture"
author: "Fred Turner"
section_kind: "Ch3"
section: "The Whole Earth Catalog as Information Technology"
source_pages: "80-113"
type: source
---

# The Whole Earth Catalog as Information Technology

After the Trips Festival, Brand continued to show America Needs Indians and to develop other slide shows and multimedia events. Part performance artist, part social reformer, part genial party host, he moved from project to project, trying to create holistic media environments of the kind favored by USCO and the Merry Pranksters. He also turned to making buttons:

One afternoon, probably in March in 1966, dropping a little bit of

LSD, I went up onto the roof and sat shivering in a blanket sort of

looking and thinking. . . . And so I’m watching the buildings, looking out

at San Francisco, thinking of Buckminster Fuller’s notion that people

think of the earth’s resources as unlimited because they think of the

earth as flat. I’m looking at San Francisco from 300 feet and 200 micro-

grams up and thinking that I can see from here that the earth is curved.

I had the idea that the higher you go the more you can see earth as

round.

There were no public photographs of the whole earth at that

time, despite the fact that we were in the space program for about

ten years. I started scheming within the trip. How can I make this

photograph happen? Because I have now persuaded myself that it will

change everything if we have this photograph looking at the earth

from space.1

The next week, Brand printed up a batch of buttons that read “Why Haven’t We Seen a Photograph of the Whole Earth yet?” and started selling them at Berkeley’s Sather Gate. When a dean threw him out, his removal was covered by the San Francisco Chronicle.

At about the same time, Brand got married. In 1965, at a meeting of the National Congress of American Indians, he had met Lois Jennings, a former mathematician for the U.S. Navy and a member of the Grand Traverse band of the Ottowa. They married in the spring of 1966, and in late 1967 they moved to Menlo Park, where Brand began working at his friend Dick Raymond’s nonprofit educational foundation, the Portola Institute. Founded a year earlier, the Portola Institute housed and helped develop a variety of influential Bay area organizations, including the Briarpatch Society, the Ortega Park Teachers Laboratory, the Farallones Institute, the Urban House, the Simple Living Project, and Big Rock Candy Mountain publishers, as well as its most visible production, the Whole Earth Catalog. As Theodore Roszak has suggested, Portola’s efforts were all designed “to scale-down, democratize, and humanize our hypertrophic technological society.”2 When Stewart Brand joined, much of Portola’s energy was directed toward providing computer education in the schools and developing simulation games for the classroom. The person leading that effort was Bob Albrecht, who later entered personal computer lore as a cofounder of the People’s Computer Company and a key member of the Homebrew Computer Club.

The Portola Institute served as a meeting ground for counterculturalists, academics, and technologists in large part because of its location. Within four blocks of its offices, one could find the offices of the Free University—a polyglot self-education project that offered all sorts of courses, ranging from mathematics to encounter groups, usually taught in neighboring homes—and two off-center bookstores (Kepler’s and East-West). A little farther away was the Stanford Research Institute, where Dick Raymond had worked for a number of years, and not far beyond that, Stanford University. In addition, many of Portola’s members represented multiple communities. Albrecht had worked at Control Data Corporation and brought with him advanced programming skills and links to the corporate world of computing, along with a commitment to empowering schoolchildren. Brand and Raymond both had extensive experience in the Bay area psychedelic scene. And Portola’s various projects kept its members in circulation: teachers, communards, computer programmers—all came through the offices at one time or another.3

In his first few months at Portola, Brand moved from project to project, unsure of what to focus on. In March of 1968, however, his father died, leaving him an inheritance of about one hundred thousand dollars in stock. On the flight home from Illinois, Brand began thinking about how many of the people he knew from the Bay area countercultural scene had lately begun to move out into rural areas to live communally. As he described it at the end of the Last Whole Earth Catalog three years later, imagining his friends

“starting their own civilization hither and yon in the sticks” got him thinking about the L.L.Bean catalog. This led him to fantasize about something he called the “Access Mobile.” It would consist of a catalog and a “road show” and would offer “all manner of access materials and advice for sale cheap,” including books, camping gear, blueprints for houses and machines, and subscriptions to magazines.4 That spring, Brand spent much of his time scouring local bookstores, writing to publishers, and identifying items for a potential catalog. In July he printed up a six-page, mimeographed list of approximately 120 items for sale, put samples of many of them in a Dodge pickup, and with his wife, Lois, drove out to New Mexico and Colorado to visit the communes then appearing in the plains and hills. In one month, he and Lois sold some two hundred dollars’ worth of goods.

Over the next four years, Stewart and Lois Brand turned that first mimeographed sheet into one of the defining documents of the American counterculture. Sized somewhere between a tabloid newspaper and a glossy magazine, divided into seven categories, and, in its National Book Award–winning 1971 incarnation, spread out over 448 pages, the Whole Earth Catalog featured a smorgasbord of books, mechanical devices, and outdoor recreational gear. A novel or a piece of literary journalism might have offered its readers a narrative thread to follow through the text from beginning to end, or a coherent authorial voice to cling to when the plot got murky, but the Catalog offered a cacophony of artifacts, voices, and visual design. Home weaving kits and potters’ wheels banged up against reports on the science of plastics. Bamboo flutes shared space with books on computer-generated music. Readers couldn’t actually buy any of these goods through the Catalog—to make purchases they would have to visit the Whole Earth Truck Store in Menlo Park, California, or turn to other retailers. But they could write in to recommend new products, to respond to other contributors’ reviews, or to simply describe experiences that might be of interest to other Whole Earth readers. Neither book, nor magazine, nor traditional mail-order outlet, the Whole Earth Catalog represented something new in American publishing, and no one at the time could say quite what.

To journalists like Ed McClanahan, writing in Esquire magazine, it appeared that “the whole diffuse business . . . was held together by some mysterious principle of internal dynamics, some inscrutable law of metaphysics which I simply didn’t understand, which no one who hadn’t actually been close to the very center of the entire Whole Earth operation could even begin to define.”5 Nearly forty years later, that law looks less like an abstract principle of metaphysics than the product of Stewart Brand’s network entrepreneurship and the convergence of systems theory and New Communalist politics that it facilitated. At one level, Brand’s migrations throughout

the 1960s represented a personal quest to find an alternative to the gray adult world he so feared in 1957. At another, though, they marked his emergence as an intellectual and cultural broker and, more broadly, the increasing importance of mobility and networking as an American cultural style. As he migrated from Stanford to the art worlds of Manhattan and the psychedelic bohemias of San Francisco, Brand became a key link between very different countercultural, academic, and technological communities. When he founded the Whole Earth Catalog in 1968, he gathered those communities into a single textual space.

That space in turn became a network forum—a place where members of these communities came together, exchanged ideas and legitimacy, and in the process synthesized new intellectual frameworks and new social networks. By coining the term network forum I aim to bridge two important ideas in science and technology studies: Peter Galison’s notion of the “trading zone” and Susan Leigh Star and James Griesemer’s “boundary object.” Network forums function like a trading zone in that they are sites where representatives of multiple disciplines come together to work and, as they do, establish contact languages for purposes of collaboration. Yet, for Galison, as for the anthropologists on whom he draws, trading zones are physical sites such as laboratories. In a 1989 study of Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Star and Griesemer suggested that a media artifact could serve some of the same collaborative ends. Like Galison, they showed that scientific work required collaboration by members of a wide variety of subdisciplines. Those individuals, they argued, found ways to collaborate and yet retain their individual allegiances to their fields of origin in part through the creation and circulation of “boundary objects”—that is, “objects which both inhabit several intersecting social worlds and satisfy the informational requirements of each.” For Star and Griesemer, these objects included indexed repositories of collected objects, maps, diagrams, standardized forms, and objects with commonly agreed-upon boundaries but with content that could be viewed differently by different members.6

A network forum displays properties of both the trading zone and the boundary object. Like the boundary object, it can be a media formation such as a catalog or an online discussion system around or within which individuals can gather and collaborate without relinquishing their attachment to their home networks. But like the trading zone, it is also a place within which new networks can be built, not only for social purposes, but for the purpose of accomplishing work. Within the network forum, as within the trading zone, contributors create new rhetorical tools with which to express and facilitate their new collaborations. Network forums need not be confined to media. Think tanks, conferences, even open-air markets—all

can serve as forums in which one or more entrepreneurs gather members of multiple networks, allow them to communicate and collaborate, and so facilitate the formation of both new networks and new contact languages. Media-based network forums such as the Whole Earth Catalog, however, are in part built out of these new languages and are in part sites for their display. Ultimately, the forums themselves often become prototypes of the shared understandings around which they are built.7

The Whole Earth Catalog played all of these roles, first for its contributors and its original, commune-based readership and, within three years, for readers far and wide. A comprehensive survey of the Whole Earth Catalog’s contents and contributors from its founding in 1968 through 1971 reveals that it featured contributions from four somewhat overlapping social groups: the world of university-, government-, and industry-based science and technology; the New York and San Francisco art scenes; the Bay area psychedelic community; and the communes that sprang up across America in the late 1960s. When these groups met in its pages, the Catalog became the single most visible publication in which the technological and intellectual output of industry and high science met the Eastern religion, acid mysticism, and communal social theory of the back-to-the-land movement. It also became the home and emblem of a new, geographically distributed community. As they flipped through and wrote in to its several editions, contributors and readers peered across the social and intellectual fences of their home communities. Like the collaborative researchers of World War II, they became interdisciplinarians, cobbling together new understandings of the ways in which information and technology might reshape social life. Together, they came to argue that technologies should be small-scale, should support the development of individual consciousness, and therefore should be both informational and personal. Readers who wrote in also celebrated entrepreneurial work and heterarchical forms of social organization, promoted disembodied community as an achievable ideal, and suggested that techno-social systems could serve as sites of ecstatic communion.

Over time, both these beliefs and the networks of readers and contributors who developed them, along with the Catalog itself, helped create the cultural conditions under which microcomputers and computer networks could be imagined as tools of liberation.

Communities of Consciousness Brand later argued that to the extent that the Whole Earth Catalog reflected a particular “theory of civilization,” it was a theory developed on the communes. By the summer of 1967, nearly a half million American soldiers were

stationed in Vietnam and more were being drafted every day. Antiwar protests had taken on a new intensity, with marchers burning draft cards in Boston’s Arlington Street Church and confronting armed troops at the Pentagon. American cities had turned into battlefields as well; in 1967 alone, 167 experienced riots, most with racial overtones. In July, days of rioting in Detroit left 43 residents dead, almost 2,000 injured, and 5,000 homeless. The federal government had to call in some fifteen thousand state police and National Guardsmen to restore order.8 In the fall of that year, the twin ills of a growing war abroad and intensifying violence at home helped drive thousands of young, college-educated, and predominantly white Americans to seek out rural havens. Not all communes were rural, of course—there was an increase in different city-based cooperative living arrangements as well—but for the hundreds that were in the countryside, the hinterlands of America seemed to promise the possibility of building a new, collaborative society. If the rest of America was preoccupied with violence and political struggle, the communes would take up the politics of consciousness. If Americans were at war with one another and with foreign enemies, the citizens of the communes would build self-sufficient, nonhierarchical communities based on interpersonal harmony. And the land itself—imagined as fertile, open, welcoming—would become a new frontier on which the commune dwellers could explore the limits of their own minds, their own bodies, and their own collective possibilities.

Yet even as they set out to escape mainstream technocratic society, founders of the intentional communities of the Southwest embraced the technophilic, consciousness-oriented value systems that Brand had encountered earlier in USCO and among the Merry Pranksters and, beyond them, though less explicitly, the collaborative research culture of cold war America. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, intentional communities tended to be organized along one of two lines: either free-flowing anarchy or rigid, usually religious, social order.9 Both types of communities, however, embraced the notion that small-scale technologies could transform the individual consciousness and, with it, the nature of community. They also celebrated the imagery of the American frontier. Many communards saw themselves as latter-day cowboys and Indians, moving out onto the open plains in order to find a better life.10

Early in their travels, for instance, Stewart and Lois Brand visited one of the first and most influential of the nonreligious communities, Drop City. Founded in 1965, Drop City blossomed in a cluster of geodesic domes on the plains of Colorado, near the town of Trinidad. Like USCO and, to some extent, the Merry Pranksters, Drop City was devoted to pursuing collective harmony and creating traveling pieces of multimedia theater,

in this case called Droppings. Cofounder Peter Rabbit explained at the time, “There is no political structure in Drop City. Things work out; the cosmic forces mesh with people in a strange complex intuitive interaction. . . . When things are done the slow intuitive way the tribe makes sense.”11 At Drop City, individuals were free to come and go whenever they liked and to pursue what interested them moment to moment. This freedom they believed would lead to a greater state of collective harmony, with one another and with unseen forces in the universe. “We dance the joydance, we listen to the eternal rhythm, our feet move to unity . . . livelove-joy-energy are one,” wrote Rabbit, echoing the tenets of USCO. “We are all one.”12

As in the performances of USCO and the Pranksters, the citizens of Drop City and other communes depended on small-scale technologies to link them together. LSD, peyote, rock and roll— each revealed the fundamental links between all living things and the otherwise invisible energies governing the material world. So too did the tools required to do the work of daily life. This was especially true in communes organized along religious lines. In early 1968, Stewart Brand’s old friends Steve and Barbara Durkee of USCO, now disciples of the Indian guru Meher Baba, established the Lama Foundation near Taos, New Mexico. One of a cluster of communes in the region, the Lama Foundation was designed to facilitate personal spiritual transformation. The goal of the foundation was “to awaken consciousness,” explained Steve Durkee at the time.13 In order to facilitate this process, the foundation, like Drop City, claimed to do away with hierarchical forms of government. “We’re anti-priesthood,” said Durkee. “The world that makes sense is a world where each man and each woman lives out time and the cycles of the seasons, where no man is a priest and every man is a priest, and where the duty to maintain the cosmos is dependent on everybody instead of just a select few. . . . There are no priests here because everybody is a priest. There are none other than the elect.”14 In point of fact, Durkee and a committee called the Caretakers maintained a firm grip on the community. Yet, in theory at least, relations between individual members, and between members and cosmic forces, were to be governed in part by small-scale technologies and their deployment in collaborative labor. “Everything we do here is a kind of karma yoga,” explained Barbara Durkee. “Chopping wood or carrying water, done in the right spirit, are meditation. . . . We praise God by building domes.” For the members of the Lama Foundation, as for the Transcendentalists of New England, “The essence of spirituality [was] practicality.”15 And in that context, small-scale tools offered both a way to get a job done and a route toward the transformation of one’s self, one’s community, and, ultimately, the world.

Yet, even though it aimed to draw commune dwellers closer to themselves and their fellow citizens, the antinomian celebration of consciousness and its pursuit through the deployment of small-scale technologies and hands-on work did not prevent either social friction or the reassertion of traditional gender roles and racial politics. The do-your-own-thing ethos of the anarchic communes tended to drive away those with more structured ambitions. At Drop City, for instance, the day-to-day chaos created by the group’s anarchistic politics, along with an overwhelming number of visitors in the summer of 1967, caused many of the founders to leave within three years. The stresses of building a community from scratch affected religious groups as well. Only five years after they came to New Mexico, the Durkees had left the Lama Foundation. What order obtained on many communes depended less on systems of explicit social control than on social resources and cultural habits imported from the New Communalists’ former lives. More than a few communes were built with inherited money and sustained with welfare checks and food stamps. And many commune residents felt at home in large part because they were surrounded by others like themselves. As a resident of the New Buffalo commune outside Taos put it, “Here the one thing you’re sure of is that you’re pretty much on each other’s side.”16

Even as they imagined themselves to be colonizing new social frontiers, many New Communalists recreated the conservative gender, class, and race relations of cold war America. By 1967, within the New Left at least, women had begun to claim power in large part by asserting their rights in the political sphere.17 On the communes of the New Communalist movement, by contrast, women often pursued authority by asserting a neotraditional femininity in the domestic sphere. As sociologist Rosabeth Moss Kanter has shown, communes outside the New Communalist tradition frequently divided up the childrearing, cooking, and cleaning commonly associated with the nuclear family, and as a result, a woman’s status often had relatively little to do with her partnerships with men. In the rural communes of the back-to-the-land movement, however, men and women often pursued a neoprimitive, tribal ideal in which men made “important” decisions while women tended the kitchen and the children. Brand’s wife Lois had grown up in suburban Maryland. She later recalled that on the communes she and Stewart visited, work was commonly divided along gender lines. “It wasn’t that far removed from what I’d grown up with at home,” she explained. “My brother cut the lawn and I did the dishes.” On the communes, she reported, men worked on construction projects while “women put the Clorox in the water to keep everyone from getting sick.”18

In many rural groups, men and women framed their gender roles in terms of an imaginary American frontier. They were not simply tribesmen,

but settlers, and the process of rediscovering themselves and a down-home landscape they had imagined but never known became part of the thrill of being together—particularly for men. In 1970 journalist William Hedgepeth described gender relations at New Buffalo thus: “Without becoming bogged-down in sexual identity crises and the ‘feminine mystique’ type traumas that idle females flagellate themselves with back in Suburbia, the New Buffalo girls fulfill themselves naturally not only in sewing, cooking, cleaning or child-tending, but also in freely voicing their views and mystical visions, and then acting upon them. . . . ‘We’re trying to live a way that’s never been lived before,’ says Siva [a female New Buffalo resident]. ‘There’s no double standard here. We’ll find out together how this works.’”19 Yet, despite Hedgepeth’s picture of mystically inflected domesticity, many communes, including New Buffalo, did not so much leave suburban gender relations behind as recreate them within a frontier fantasy. One man who lived at New Buffalo could have been speaking for many at other communes when he told Hedgepeth, “A girl just becomes so . . . so womanly when she’s doing something like baking her own bread in a wood stove. I can’t explain it. It just turns me on.”20

Race relations echoed patterns found elsewhere in the counterculture. Virtually all of the back-to-the-landers were white, and most were under thirty years of age, well-educated, socially privileged, and financially stable. Explicit prejudice against African Americans or other people of color would have been unwelcome on almost all communes. In fact, by the late 1960s, more than a few New Communalists, like some on the New Left, saw themselves as social revolutionaries. “We are very much like the Vietcong,” explained Bill Wheeler, who founded Wheeler’s Ranch in California’s Sonoma County. “We are a form of guerilla warfare and we’re going to take our losses.” At the same time, however, very few nonwhites took part in the New Communalist migrations of the time, and those who did were often as well-educated and well-off as their white counterparts.21

Throughout the New Communalist movement, it was far more common for young, white, highly mobile hippies to find their interests in conflict with those of the comparatively impoverished and immobile populations of Hispanics and African Americans among whom they often settled.22 As communes sprang up around Taos, New Mexico, for example, realtors celebrated the hippie-driven rise in land values while other local residents seethed. William Hedgepeth recalled watching a long-time Hispanic resident tell some new, white arrivals, “You see the scenery. We see a battleground.” By the summer of 1969, teachers in the Taos public schools had banded together to write an antihippie resolution decrying the commune-dwellers’ “excesses in drug addiction, sexual immorality, obscene behavior . . . and

public exhibitions of perversion and licentiousness.”23 As this resolution suggests, part of the problem was simply that hippies brought with them an alien code of behavior. In addition, though, their arrival tapped into memories of very old patterns of colonization and migration. A Chicano member of New Mexico’s Reality Construction Company commune told a visiting reporter, “Every time a white hippie comes in and buys a Chicano’s land to escape the fuckin’ city, he sends that Chicano to the city to go through what he’s trying to escape from, can you dig it? What can you do with that bread out here, man? Nothing. Then when that money’s gone, see, the Chicano has to stay in the city, cause now he ain’t got no land to come back to. He’s stuck, and the hippie’s free. That’s why they don’t dig the fuckin’ hippies, man.”24

And yet, in their own minds at least, the New Communalists were not simply colonizers. They may have bought up lands that formerly belonged to farmers and laborers, and they may have appropriated what they imagined to be working-class styles of manual labor and associated values of craft; but above all, they saw themselves as well-equipped refugees from technocracy. Drawing on the education, money, and technological savvy provided by the American mainstream and, less self-consciously, on its frontier mythology, they aimed to build communities that not only would serve as alternatives to a buttoned-down society, but would ultimately save that society from itself. If nuclear weapons and the Vietnam War, and perhaps even the urban riots that had plagued the last decade, were the products of a technocratic bureaucracy, then small-scale tools, the pursuit of higher consciousness, and the development of rural collaboratives might undermine the bureaucracy itself and, in the process, forecast a new, more harmonious future.

The Whole Earth Catalog as a Network Forum In Brand’s view, as in that of the USCO artists, the underlying principles of such a future had already been mapped by scientists and technologists in terms of energy and information—that is, in terms of systems theory. Brand drew on that theory to design a catalog that would supply the communes with goods but that would also link their political project to the ideals and practices of the American research establishment. In 1971 Brand recalled that at the Catalog’s founding, “the problem was How to Generate a Low-Maintenance High-Yield Self-Sustaining Critical Information Service”—a system for alerting communards to the latest social and technological developments and for linking them to one another. At the same time, though, Brand aimed to imitate the goals and tactics of American research culture.

Brand recalled, also in 1971, that he had “imagined us becoming primarily a research organization, with nifty projects everywhere, earnest folk climbing around on new dome designs, solar generators.”25 Some years later, he explained the link between service to the counterculture and the Catalog’s research orientation thus: “If [the commune dwellers] were going to go back to basics, they needed to know where the basics were. And I didn’t either. But I set in motion a thing by which by purveying the stuff, and being a node of a network of people purveying it to each other. . . . I would get to learn whatever that network was learning. So it’s being paid to get an education kind of thing. And it was designed as a system. I knew about systems. I had studied cybernetics.”26

At one level, then, the Catalog served to make items of use available to an emerging, geographically distributed network of communes. At another, it served as a textual forum within which back-to-the-landers could meet one another, as well as technologists, academics, and artists, and share information. At both of these levels, systems theory became a contact language and a structuring principle. It organized the Catalog’s contents and shaped the reader’s role in regard to those contents. Coupled to the New Communalist critique of hierarchical politics, it also provided Stewart Brand with a theory of editorial process and management practice that was particularly well suited to the coordination of multiple communities. Married to the frontier rhetoric of “cowboys and Indians,” systems theory offered Whole Earth readers a way to link their countercultural attempts to transform themselves and their communities to the trajectory of American myth. Like its New Communalist audience, the Catalog celebrated small-scale technologies—and, again, itself—as ways for individuals to improve their lives. But it also offered up those tools—and itself—as prototypes of a new relationship between the individual, information, and technology. Like the scientific entrepreneurs of MIT’s Rad Lab, the New Communalist adventurers of the Whole Earth Catalog were to become independent, collaborative, and mobile, and they were to build the norms of their communities into technologies and information systems that would both support those communities and model their ideals to the outside world.

At the start, the Catalog was a fairly modest proposition. After their first foray to the communes, Stewart and Lois returned to Menlo Park, hired two assistants, and, with a small portion of Brand’s inheritance, as well as several thousand dollars Lois had inherited from her grandmother, printed one thousand copies of the first Whole Earth Catalog.27 On its cover the first Catalog featured a photograph of the earth taken from space by a 1967 NASA expedition under the words, “WHOLE EARTH CATALOG / access to tools.” On the back was a photograph of a solar eclipse under the words, “We can’t put

it together. It is together.” Inside approximately 133 items were listed, more or less evenly distributed across seven thematic categories:

Understanding Whole Systems

Shelter and Land Use

Industry and Craft

Communications

Community

Nomadics

Learning

For the first, 61-page, edition of the Catalog, which retailed for five dollars, Brand selected virtually all the items; by 1971, a year in which the Catalog sprawled over 448 pages, sold more than a million copies, and won the National Book Award, many items had been recommended and reviewed by readers. Ninety-eight of the items listed in the first edition, and a similar portion in later editions, were books. At the front of the Catalog, in “Understanding Whole Systems,” works by Buckminster Fuller met books on geology and biology; a little later, in “Community,” the Merck Manual could be found alongside a chronicle of kibbutz life and a catalog of art prints. The Catalog listed periodicals as well, some emanating from the counterculture, such as the Modern Utopian and the Realist, others more mainstream, like National Geographic and Scientific American. The Catalog also offered mechanical and electrical devices, such as a forty-nine-hundreddollar Hewlett-Packard desktop calculator (depicted directly above an entry for Norbert Weiner’s book Cybernetics in the “Communication” section) and a one-man sawmill, as well as catalogs for companies ranging from L.L.Bean to Allied Electronics. The Catalog presented these items within a design framework that echoed the frontier preoccupations of the back-tothe-land movement and the psychedelic design inclinations of the contemporary alternative press. Each page featured multiple typefaces, many seemingly created in the nineteenth century. They appeared on plain, rough paper—the tactile antithesis of the glossy magazine. At the same time, the Catalog offered a riot of photographs, bits of text, and reader commentary that would have been familiar to readers of underground papers such as the San Francisco Oracle or the Berkeley Barb. Like its choice of products, the Catalog’s design mingled the psychedelic, the nostalgic, and the practical.28

The first Catalog did not sell quickly, but it did sell— enough for Stewart, Lois, and their staff to imagine producing a series of catalogs.29 In January of 1969, as part of this process, Brand published the first quarterly update to the Catalog, which he called the Supplement. In addition to product news,

the Supplement offered articles and letters from and about the communities Brand had visited. The first issue of the Supplement, for instance, included letters from Pranksters Ken Kesey and Ron Bevirt; Peter Rabbit of Drop City and, more recently, the Libre Commune; and Steve Durkee from the Lama Foundation, and an exchange between Steve Baer, who had designed the dome housing at Drop City, and Dave Evans, a staffer at Doug Engelbart’s Augmented Human Intellect project at the Stanford Research Institute. It also featured a detailed description of how to build a solar water heater, four pages of free events and services in New York City, and announcements for several experiments in living and building, including an advertisement for Paolo Soleri’s desert utopia, Arcosanti, and a proposal for “A Libertarian Nomadic Association in Southern California.” As the Catalog gave access to tools, the Supplement gave readers a view of the communal world in which the tools were being used and a way to contact its members.

Over the next three years, the Whole Earth Catalog and the Supplement grew exponentially and so did their audience.30 Before they announced that they would cease publication with the Last Whole Earth Catalog of 1971, Stewart, Lois, and a growing staff produced six different semiannual editions of the Catalog, of which some 2.5 million copies were ultimately sold, and nine quarterly Supplements.31 By 1971 the number of items listed in the Catalog had increased nearly tenfold to 1,072. In 1968 Brand had designed the Catalog specifically for a commune-bound readership; within three years, the Catalog could be found in bookstores and living rooms in cities and suburbs across America. For many, the Catalog provided a first, and sometimes overwhelming, glimpse of the New Communalists’ intellectual world. Gareth Branwyn, for instance, a journalist who later wrote for Wired magazine, recalled the day in 1971 when he saw his first copy of the Catalog: “I was instantly enthralled. I’d never seen anything like it. We lived in a small redneck town in Virginia—people didn’t think about such things as ‘whole systems’ and ‘nomadics’ and ‘Zen Buddhism.’ . . . The Whole Earth Catalog changed my life. It was my doorway to Bucky Fuller, Gregory Bateson, whole systems, communes, and lots of other things that formed a foundation to a world model I’ve been building ever since.”32

As the Catalog grew, the categories around which it was organized, and the structuring principles and editorial practices underlying those categories, remained consistent. So did the Catalog’s products. Although later editions tended to list an increasing number of items connected to the growing outdoor recreation industry, such as camping gear and down jackets, as well as other consumer-oriented goods, the Catalog’s products tended to accumulate over time rather than to be replaced. Virtually all of the items

listed in the 1968 Whole Earth Catalog could be found again in the final edition three years later.

Looking over the range of items and the categories in which they were arranged, today, we can trace all of them back to one or another of the communities Brand visited across the 1960s. The biology and geology books of “Understanding Whole Systems” emanated from the interest Brand developed in natural systems at Stanford; the Fuller works, from his time at USCO and his visits to Fuller’s lectures. The domes depicted in “Shelter and Land Use” could be found throughout the communes of the Southwest, while the buckskin jackets depicted in “Industry and Craft” echoed the sorts of clothing once worn by the Native Americans Brand had long admired and the hippies of Haight-Ashbury as well. Desktop calculator maker Hewlett-Packard was headquartered just down the road in Palo Alto, and the I Ching offered in the “Learning” section had by then become ubiquitous in psychedelic circles. In the early issues of the Catalog, though not in the much larger editions of 1970 and 1971, it is virtually impossible to find an item offered that is not intimately linked to a community to which Brand belonged, if only somewhat marginally, between 1960 and 1968.

In linking and arranging the Catalog’s artifacts, Brand displayed not only the range of his interpersonal networking, but his allegiance to the organizational and rhetorical principles of systems theory as well. For Brand, the Whole Earth Catalog was simultaneously a whole system in its own right and a tool for its readers to use in improving the whole systems that were their lives and the world in which they lived. Readers were offered the chance to adopt two positions simultaneously in regard to the Catalog, and to their lives. Consider the Catalog’s opening statement. On the inside cover of every edition, Brand defined the Catalog’s purpose:

We are as gods and might as well get good at it. So far, remotely done power

and glory—as via government, big business, formal education, church—has

[sic] succeeded to the point where gross defects obscure actual gains. In re-

sponse to this dilemma and to these gains a realm of intimate, personal power

is developing—power of the individual to conduct his own education, find his

own inspiration, shape his own environment, and share his adventure with

whoever is interested. Tools that aid this process are sought and promoted by

the WHOLE EARTH CATALOG.

Brand’s definition clearly states the countercultural critique of hierarchical, establishment institutions as emotionally and geographically remote from the lives of citizens and, on the whole, destructive. At the same time, he intimates that he and the reader are like gods in at least two senses, one

local and one global, and both familiar from Buckminster Fuller’s Ideas and Integrities and, before that, Norbert Wiener’s Cybernetics. On the local level, the individual reader is like a god in having the power to conduct his life as he wishes, as long as he can find the appropriate tools. For Brand, as for Fuller and Wiener, the system of the universe is complete—it is not something we can put together, but something already “together” in its own right. At the local level, our job is to turn its energies and resources to our own purposes. In keeping with the countercultural critique of hierarchy, we must pursue our own, individual transformation and the transformation of the world. These transformations depend on our understanding the world as a system of invisible forces; if effectively carried out, they will result in our living lives more in synch with those forces—lives that will be more meaningful, more satisfying or, in Norbert Wiener’s terms, more homeostatically stable.

At the global level, like Fuller’s Comprehensive Designer or perhaps a cold war military planner, Brand’s reader enjoys the power of a god to survey the whole earth below him. The front cover of many editions of the Whole Earth Catalog featured an image of the earth seen from space. Simply by picking up the Catalog, the reader became a visionary of a sort. This vision, though, had been made possible by the cameras of NASA and, more generally, by the fact that he was a member of the most technologically advanced generation on earth. In the Whole Earth Catalog, cold war technocracy itself had granted its opponents the power to see the world in which they lived as a single whole.

These two perspectives are built into the reading experience of the Catalog as well. At one level, the Catalog was a “Whole Earth” in its own right. That is, it was a seemingly comprehensive informational system, an encyclopedia, a map. Simply by picking it up and flipping through its seven sections, the reader could become an astronaut looking down from space on a textual representation of a new earth. At another level, the Catalog offered its readers ways to enter its world and become “as gods” in a local sense too. The reader could order the “tools” on display and so help to create a realm of “intimate, personal power” in her or his own life (albeit by entering the commercial sphere first). One reader explained the distinction thus: “Walking to the bathhouse today, holding my new twenty-ounce hammer, I suddenly understood the Whole Earth Catalogue meaning of ‘tool.’ I always thought tools were objects, things: screw drivers, wrenches, axes, hoes. Now I realize that tools are a process: using the right-sized and shaped object in the most effective way to get a job done.”33

For this reader, as for others, the Catalog sparked an understanding of tools as means not only to get a job done, but also to enter into a process.

The process would accomplish tasks but also would transform the individual into a capable, creative person. Within this process, artifacts such as calculators and books could clearly be of assistance, but so could other people. In addition to providing information on how to order material goods, the Catalog and, to an even greater extent, the Supplement, each told readers how to reach out to one another. For Brand, the Catalog was both a “whole system” and a “tool” for readers, and so were readers themselves. They could write in and use the pages of the Catalog to tell one another about their experiences with particular products. Via the Supplement, they could learn of ongoing countercultural projects and contact one another to join in. The Catalog and the Supplement became looking glasses through which to peer down and see a reflection of an emerging world and, at the same time, spot doorways through which they could enter that world.

The principles of systems theory helped to structure not only the readers’ position in regard to the Catalog, but the world depicted within it. Throughout the 1960s, Brand had visited communities ranging from rural Native American reservations to downtown Manhattan art lofts to the Stanford Research Institute. In bringing together the array of tools and ideas he had encountered among these groups, he relied on the principle of juxtaposition to provide a sense of excitement and, paradoxically, coherence, for the reader. “How you get energy is, you take polarities and slap them next to one another,” he explained in 1970. “If you get into cybernetics and your head is just a minute ago full of organic gardening and ecology, then cybernetics starts to come alive for you in a different way.” But this juxtaposition was never ideologically neutral. As Geoffrey Bowker has pointed out, juxtaposition is a core element of the cybernetic practice of universal rhetoric and of its ideological component, legitimacy exchange.34 These principles are at work on virtually every page of the Whole Earth Catalog, and in its overarching structure as well. Together they offer a way for the members of the New Communalist movement to claim some of the legitimacy of the American research community. They also work to legitimate mainstream forces of consumption, technological production, and research as hip.

Consider the Catalog’s categories. On the face of it, the category “Nomadics” has no necessary relationship with, say, “Communications.” As the collection of high-technology devices and books on high-technological theory gathered under this heading suggest, “Communications” conjures up the world of cutting-edge electronics research. “Nomadics,” in apparent contrast, calls us back to a pre-electronic era and suggests visions of wandering tribes. Some of its contents, such as National Geographic magazine or a book called Survival Arts of the Primitive Paiutes, deal explicitly in images of these tribes. Others, such as books on wilderness survival and catalogs of

backpacks and tents, offer tools that modern readers can use to imitate their wanderings. Nevertheless, juxtaposed on the contents page of the first Whole Earth Catalog, these categories do not appear unrelated; rather, the Catalog’s statement of purpose and arrangement of categories suggest that understanding their relationship is part of the larger process of “Understanding Whole Systems.” And to the extent that the reader does in fact perceive using high-tech electronic devices and modern backpacks as somehow equivalent to participating in the wandering of pretechnological tribes, he is able to see both the technological world (of SRI, of Hewlett-Packard) and the tribal world (of ancient Native Americans and contemporary counterculturalists) as equally legitimate elements of a single system. Within the pages of the Whole Earth Catalog, each of these communities offers a set of tools, practices, and symbolic resources that can be taken up by members of the other—as ideas, if one simply reads the Catalog; as artifacts, if one buys the products on display; as practices, if one puts them to use. Moreover, the categories “Communications” and “Nomadics” do not merely rub shoulders; they make possible the exchange of legitimacy across conceptual and community boundaries. Equipped with a backpack and a book on cybernetics, the neotribal New Communalist can roam from commune to commune, imagining himself as simultaneously ancient and contemporary. He is an Indian; he is also an engineer.

This sort of legitimacy exchange takes place at the micro-level as well. On a single page in the “Understanding Whole Systems” section, for instance, the first Whole Earth Catalog depicts two books of photographs: Hanns Reich’s The World from Above and Joseph Royce’s Surface Anatomy.35 At the top of the page, Brand has printed four images from Reich’s book that illustrate abstract patterns on the surface of the earth seen from an airplane: rivers flowing, houses boxed up into blocks, clouds billowing from a volcano. Beneath these are five images from Surface Anatomy. Each depicts a portion of a naked human body: the torsos of an old man and a young girl; the clenched fists of a baby and an adult. Juxtaposed with the images of the earth, these pictures suggest an analogy: the human skin and the skin of the earth both cover whole worlds, whole systems, as it were. Those systems are composed of abstract patterns, patterns that not only live within each of them, but that also flow through and across both of them. The reader can survey these images, can see them from above, thanks to the hidden presence of modern technologies (the camera, the airplane), even as he finds himself conceptually implicated in the analogy. After all, the reader’s flesh has a surface anatomy of its own; the skin of his hands is not so different from the skin in the photographs. Perhaps he is a “whole system” as well. Perhaps he is both a citizen of the earth and, as a packet of informational

patterns, its emblem too, just as he is both a reader of the Whole Earth Catalog (a system of tools) and, potentially, a tool for others in his own right.

In this dizzying string of analogies, we can hear echoes of Ralph Waldo Emerson, Norbert Wiener, and, of course, Buckminster Fuller. But for many of the readers of the Whole Earth Catalog, the analogies were more than the stuff of Romantic or cybernetic theory. They could be lived. In keeping with Brand’s statement of its purpose, and with the collective ambitions of the New Communalists, the Catalog’s structure and rhetorical strategies worked to shape an imagined reader who was a visionary, with a view of the planet’s condition, and a local actor, with the ability to shape the larger world by shaping his local surroundings. Scrambling across the industrial landscape, plucking its technological fruits and replanting them in his own garden, this reader would be nomad and technocrat, local citizen and Comprehensive Designer. In the pages of the Whole Earth Catalog and its Supplement, readers could glimpse individuals who seemed to be leading this life, even as, by interacting with the Catalog itself, they could mimic some of the practices on which such a life would be based.

They could also read extensive descriptions of this new way of being, written by other readers. In the July 1969 Supplement, for instance, a reader wrote in from the Ant Farm art and design collective in Space City, Texas.36 Beside a picture of a naked man and a naked woman posed in front of a wall of electronic devices, their shoulders draped in cable, he described a figure called the “Cowboy Nomad” and tried to place him in history:

THE FRONTIER DAYS WERE LAND OWNIN, PUTTING DOWN ROOTS, SELF

SUFFICIENT FARMER STABILITY. THE COWBOY WAS LIVING IN ANOTHER LIFE STYLE,

SACRIFICING COMFORT FOR FREEDOM AND MOBILITY.

THE COWBOY NOMAD CARRIED ALL HIS LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS WITH HIM BEING

RESTRICTED BY WHAT HIS VECHICLE (HORSE) COULD CARRY.

COWBOY NOMAD EQUIPMENT: SAFETY MATCHES / KWIK START ENERGY

BANDANA / CLIMATE PROTECTION TOOL BED ROLL / THROW DOWN SLEEP

ANYWHERE SADDLE BAGS / HAD CARRY STORAGE PAK SIDE IRON / TAKE YOUR

OWN JUDICIAL.

SOCIETY TODAY IS AMBIGUOUS, LAWS ENFORCE STATIC LIVING PATTERNS WITH

VOTER RESIDENCY LAW, DRIVERS LICENSE STATE JURISDICTION, STATES RIGHTS

KEEP YOU IN YOUR PLACE, IN A CIVILIZATION DESIGNED FOR MOBILITY. UNLIKE

THE COWBOY, WE CAN GET QUICK FOOD, NEWS, SUPPLIES, ANYWHERE ON THE

ROAD IN THE UNIVERSAL COMMERCIAL SERVICES MATRIX (YOU CAN GET COCA

COLA ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD) THE HOWARD JOHNSONS ARE ALL THE SAME AS

THE SEVEN ELEVEN, O-TOT-UM, PAK-A-SAK, LITTLE GENERAL, BABY GIANT,

PIK-A-PAK, TOM THUMB MARKET. IF WE PUT YOU IN AN AMERICAN SUPERMARKET

DISORIENTED TIME CLIP, HOW LONG WOULD IT TAKE YOU TO GUESS THE CITY

YOU ARE IN?

YET THERE ARE COWBOY NOMADS TODAY, LIVING IN ANOTHER LIFE STYLE, AND

WAITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA, THAT EVERYONE KNOWS IS DOING IT, TO BLOW

THE MINDS OF THE MIDDLE CLASS AMERICAN SUBURBANITE. WHILE THEY WAIT

THE COWBOY NOMADS (OUTLAWS) SMOKE LOCO WEED AROUND ELECTRIC

CAMPFIRES.

“ WILL YOU BE STAYING HERE IN DODGE CITY, MR MAVERICK?”

“ WELL MAM, I RECKON I’D GET AWFUL ITCHY BOOTS SITTING AROUND IN ONE

PLACE VERY LONG.”37

Grafted onto the historical figure of the American cowboy, this new “Cowboy Nomad” is part Marshall McLuhan and part Ken Kesey. He roams, but he takes his electronic (and psychedelic) technology with him. He can’t bear the commercial American landscape or the middle class, and yet he lives off the bounty they have produced. And he is a “he”—there are no women in sight.

The Cowboy Nomad figure reappears throughout the Catalog, in a variety of guises. In 1970 Gurney Norman summoned up images of Daniel Boone and eighteenth-century Native American warriors, melded them into the figure of what he called the “Long Hunter,” and suggested that they offered fit models for contemporary life:

The metaphor is inescapable: today’s middle-class consumer culture as a

Mother Country to cut loose from; then a period of long-learning, in which

modern frontiersmen gain the individual competence that allows them to do

the necessary, practical things. Indians were the original teachers. They are

with us still, their ways and attitudes remain as models, to emulate and learn

from. But today, they are joined by others who qualify as “Indians” of a sort,

by virtue of their skills which allow them to function as teachers, as shamen

[sic], as knowers of The Way. Certain thinkers, certain mystics, certain far-out

entrepreneurs, qualify, but so do certain small farmers and artisans, aborigines

of a kind, native to their places, there on the land to be learned from by

modern Long Hunters willing to range beyond the settled places in search of

education and adventure.38

Norman’s “Long Hunter,” like the Cowboy Nomad, acts out in myth what the reader of the Whole Earth Catalog is asked to act out in the process of reading. Like the reader, the Long Hunter is simultaneously to survey the landscape as a whole and acquire the specialized knowledge of nomads and entrepreneurs. He is to reject middle-class consumer culture (the feminized “Mother country”), though not the process of consumption. Mobile, flexible, masculine, he is to consume knowledge and information and carry it with him on his migrations.

In short, despite the talk of cowboys and Indians, he is to become a member of an information-oriented, entrepreneurial elite. Like a Prankster playing the “Humanoid Radio” game, he is to be able to channel both the electrical currents running through his calculators and radios and the mystical currents of “The Way.” He is also to inhabit what Buckminster Fuller called an “outlaw area,” a place to experiment outside the strictures of everyday law.39 For the New Communalists, in keeping with the rhetoric of the American frontier, these areas were represented by rural America. But even for these groups, the “outlaw area” was as much an idea as an actual landscape. And that idea had come to life in other areas of American society as well—particularly the space program. In the January 1970 edition of the Supplement, Brand printed portions of an article by physicist Freeman Dyson, father of 1990s dot-com guru Esther Dyson, that made this connection clear. Space, wrote Dyson, would always be big enough to provide a home for “rebels and outlaws.” There they could “experiment undisturbed with the creation of radically new types of human beings, surpassing us in mental capacities as we surpass the apes.”40

In Buckminster Fuller’s “outlaw area,” and in Dyson’s social-Darwinist vision of space, we can glimpse the first intimations of the libertarian “cyberspace” of the early 1990s. Likewise, even as they summon up Daniel Boone and Buffalo Bill Cody, the figures of the Cowboy Nomad and the Long Hunter point toward the entrepreneurial high-tech engineers of the dotcom craze and their missionary zeal. In each of these instances, the symbolic consequences of legitimacy exchange reach across countercultural, scientific, and technological communities. As it links communes such as Drop City and the Lama Foundation to centers of high technology such as SRI and groups devoted to techno-social exploration, such as USCO and the Pranksters, the Catalog also facilitates the blending of their symbolic repertoires. Out of this blending, there emerged the image of a new kind of person, one who moved from task to task pursuing information and using technical tools in an experimental manner for the advancement of himself or herself and society. The text of the Whole Earth Catalog, organized according to the principles of systems theory, served the reader as a tool in this

process and also, through both the reader reports it printed and the reading practices its structure suggested, offered him or her an opportunity to try on this new sort of self.41

This self was not alone. If the Whole Earth Catalog served as a guide to a new way of being an individual, it also modeled and offered access to new ways of being in community. “I think the whole scene is tantamount to a sort of community in print, with the crafty taciturn old bastards hawking and spitting into the fire, and occasionally laying one on us out of the experience store,” wrote reader Rolan Jacopetti in the March 1969 Supplement. “Sheeeeeeeit, son, you talkin’ geodesic domes . . . hell, I recollect me and Bucky once . . .” 42 In part that community was a function of network representation. In the Supplement and to a lesser extent in the Catalog, living members of actual communities wrote in to the Whole Earth, chatting, recommending products, and so on. The products themselves represented and invoked the networks in which Brand first encountered them. Together, the Catalog and the Supplement became textual forums within which a geographically dispersed collection of individuals and groups could come together, in text and sometimes pictures, and recognize each other as members of a single community. In a sense, Catalog and Supplement became town squares.

In their design and in their management and editorial practices, the Catalog and the Supplement were governed in keeping with principles derived both from the New Communalist critique of hierarchical organization and agonistic politics and from the systems orientation of population biology and cybernetics. A more traditional text, including a catalog, might have featured hierarchical elements of organization at several levels. It might have privileged a single author’s voice, recounting events or framing products from that author’s singular perspective. Or it might have arranged items or information in such a way as to emphasize that some things or ideas were more important than others. In the Catalog, Brand and his staff undercut these potential hierarchies. Instead of a single author’s voice, Brand featured the voices of various reviewers and letter-writers and bits of text from the products themselves. A few items, such as Buckminster Fuller’s writings, received extra space, but virtually all of the rest received between one-quarter and one-half of a page. Although the section “Understanding Whole Systems” stands at the front of the publication like a front door, helping to frame the reader’s experience, should he enter that way, the Catalog’s seven categories are not otherwise ranked. They are of more or less equal size and can be entered and exited by the reader at will, with no loss of comprehension for the Catalog as a whole.43

As a manager, Brand used a series of strategies to distribute power and work to readers and to downplay his own authority. First, he called for

readers to suggest and review items for the Catalog, offering them ten dollars for an accepted evaluation. Those who first suggested or reviewed an item would have their name listed in the Catalog. In this way Brand accomplished several entrepreneurial purposes: he enlarged the range of the Catalog’s contents by appealing to “experts” outside his organization; he increased his readers’ sense of commitment to and involvement with his organization; and he increased the Catalog’s own value to the community it served. In the process, he invited the reader to become a producer of economic value, a contributor to a textual community, and still a buyer of the Catalog.

Brand exercised the ultimate power to include or exclude material, however. It was his money at stake, and in the end the Whole Earth Catalog was his organization.44 In a sense, Brand sought to manage “as a god.” That is, in keeping with Fuller’s call for Comprehensive Designers, as well as his own experiences of environmental biology, he sought to set what he called the “initial conditions” of what he hoped would become a self-sustaining system.45 “What you’re trying to do is nourish and design an organism which can learn and stay alive while it’s learning,” Brand later wrote. “Once that process has its stride, don’t tinker with it, let it work for you.”46 As he had seen Ken Kesey do with the Merry Pranksters, Brand downplayed his own power within the system. Apart from the “Purpose” section at the start of each Catalog, his editorial comments and reviews tended to be brief, modest, and casual. They projected a take-it-or-leave-it tone and a sense that their author saw his readers as equals. Brand took the process farther by publishing the full financial accounts of the Whole Earth Catalog in every issue after the first. While mainstream publications kept their numbers to themselves and made their workings a mystery, the Whole Earth Catalog invited its readers in. The Catalog may have been a system like other publications, but by publishing its accounts, Brand suggested that it was an open system, one over which its readers as much as its producers retained control.

As a theory of management, Brand’s cybernetic notion of organizationas-organism allowed him to turn away from the agonistic jockeying for power that he imagined characterized life in the hierarchical organizations of the 1950s and toward a process that he called “Transcendental planning.” This method of management, he explained, involved a recognition of one’s individual interests and one’s interests in the collective good. “You are you, and you are working in your self-interest because that’s life, and you are also the event, or the thing you’re working on, that’s kind of big-S Self,” wrote Brand. “And you can identify both ways and then try to accommodate both of those selves.”47 At one level, the notion of transcendental planning echoed the communitarian ideals of the time: in its practice, Brand could

imagine his own interests to be deeply in synch with the energies and interests of those around him. And in part to model these egalitarian ideals, Brand paid everyone who worked on the Catalog the same hourly wage. At another level, though, the rhetoric of transcendental management masked the material distinctions between Brand’s own interests and his place at the Catalog, and those of the people he worked with. At the end of the day, Brand made all key editorial decisions on the Catalog and determined what to do with the profits it generated.

Tools for Transformation Even as it reached toward a more egalitarian, less combative mode of leadership, Brand’s notion of transcendental planning set the stage for the celebration of leaders who had mastered the forces of the “system” and whose own interests could be depicted as those of a revolution. In the 1990s, Wired magazine would proclaim the CEOs of telecommunications and software firms to be those leaders. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, though, the young social vanguard at which the Whole Earth was aimed was preoccupied with reclaiming the products of government and industry and transforming them into “tools.” In every edition of the Catalog, directly above the statement of purpose, there appeared the following statement of the Catalog’s function:

The WHOLE EARTH CATALOG functions as an evaluation and access device.

With it, the user should know better what is worth getting and where and

how to do the getting.

An item is listed in the CATALOG if it is deemed:

1. Useful as a tool,

2. Relevant to independent education,

3. High quality or low cost,

4. Not already common knowledge,

5. Easily available by mail.

This information is continually revised according to the experience and

suggestions of CATALOG users and staff.

On its face, this statement of function seems as plainspoken and straightforward as L. L. Bean’s introductions to his own catalog. Yet a complex series of attitudes toward technology were embedded both within both the statement and the pages of the Catalog. These attitudes were developed in the networks linked by the Catalog and would go on to shape popular perceptions of networked computing in the 1990s.

Although they were surrounded by a down-home, do-it-yourself design sensibility on every page, the items listed in the Catalog took on a strongly informational caste. First, many of them were simply information goods. In keeping with the New Communalist emphasis on the importance of changing one’s mind, the great majority of the “tools” offered by the Whole Earth Catalog were books and periodicals. Some of them, such as catalogs of mechanical devices or periodicals devoted to communal living, provided access to more material means of transformation, but most were simply books in the conventional sense. That is, they offered their readers the chance to encounter information and perspectives that might change their thinking or behavior. The books tended to speak to the reader at one or both of the levels of self suggested by the Catalog’s statement of purpose. Some, like Buckminster Fuller’s writings, or books of maps and landscape pictures, or even the mystical fiction of Carlos Castañeda, tended to depict the world as a whole system governed by invisible laws and so to address their readers as if they had a godlike ability to see the world from above. Others, such as manuals for Volkswagen repair or catalogs of military surplus gear, spoke to the reader in his or her local context. That is, they offered ways to manipulate local systems such as car engines, or to transform the products of the military-industrial complex, such as army jackets and boots, into individualistic statements of personal identity. In both cases, though, they acted first on the reader’s mind.

The same was true of the devices and other material goods the Catalog offered. Like books, these items engaged readers in practices that could help them see the material world as a whole information system in its own right. In the context of the Whole Earth Catalog, as on the rural communes of the time, a backpack or a tent did not simply offer a means of escape into the woods. It offered readers a chance to join an invisible community of nomads, to act in accord with the ancient energies of nature, and to become a more “whole” person in the process. That is, these goods would help transport the reader into an environment in which she or he might be able, at the global level, to spot the laws of nature and, at the local, personal level, to act in accord with them. In this way, tents and backpacks, like calculators and books, could aid in “independent education.” In the “whole systems” context of the Catalog, as on many communes, to be educated meant to be conscious of the energy flowing through the natural world and of the fact that the material world was nothing more than a patterning of that energy. This was the essential insight of the Trips Festival, too, and of the LSD and multimedia experiences as interpreted by the Pranksters and USCO: we are all one.

Even as they opened windows onto the universal order of things, the items in the Catalog promised to be “personal” technologies as well. First,

within the New Communalist context, they aimed to transform the consciousness of an individual user. Second, they tended to be small-scale and to engage readers in practices in which no more than a few people could take part at any one time. Books had to be read alone or to small groups. Only two or three people could share in the paddling of a canoe. Even the largest devices depicted in the Catalog, school buses and geodesic domes, could hold only tens of people at a time. In listing after listing, the Catalog took items designed or built by industrial engineers working in a massproduction context and offered them as tools for individuals and small groups. Third, the Catalog emphasized that its products belonged to the doit-yourself tradition of frontier elites: the cowboys and Indians of American myth, and now the commune keepers of the New Communalist movement. They were not simply tools to do a job; they were mechanisms that transformed their users into actors in the dramatic myths of American individualism. The readers of the Catalog, the nature of these items hinted, might be exceptional individuals, might be part of a vanguard, might in fact be able to merge consumption and technology with the dream of pre-industrial community.

The “tools” of the Whole Earth Catalog also linked multiple networks and institutions. Some items embodied their allegiances in their material components. For instance, the September 1970 Supplement featured a “Birch Bark Crib.”48 The walls of the crib were constructed of birch bark, into which the builders had inserted Plexiglas windows for the baby. The mattress was made of polystyrene. With its back-to-the-land allegiance to birch bark and its easy appropriation of industrial plastics, the crib neatly linked the world of the commune to the world of the high-technology factory. Other “tools,” however, drew readers into performing actions within which they could link the insights of multiple networks. As he fixed a Volkswagen, for instance, the Whole Earth reader could perform the role of the amateur engineer, managing a technological “system” from above, and, once the car was running, perform the role of traveling hippie nomad. The user of the I Ching likewise could throw his coins and find himself imitating the ancient Chinese and the Merry Pranksters, and, in his attempt to read the I Ching’s sayings as clues to a set of otherwise invisible probabilities, he could also act in concert with the probabilistic outlook of information theory. He could become a Comprehensive Designer, using the informational energies of the world to transform the “system” that was his life and, according to New Communalist dogma, the world itself. At the same time, he could experience the ancient and the new, the Eastern and the Western, the literary and the technological, as mutually legitimating elements of his “whole” experience.

Not all items listed in the Catalog performed this linking function. But many did. Among the most prominent of the linking items were geodesic domes. By the late 1960s, these emblems of America’s cold war inventiveness and will to survive a nuclear attack had been transformed into symbols of a holistic way of life. Buckminster Fuller had built one for his own home in 1963. By 1965 Ken Kesey was rhapsodizing over building one in which to hold an Acid Test. In 1967 the two dozen founders of Drop City attended a lecture by Fuller in Boulder, Colorado, and promptly set out to build their homes to Fuller’s blueprint. In 1968 Drop City’s lead designer, Steve Baer, published his construction recipes in his Dome Cookbook and set off a small building boom across the counterculture.49 Two of the communes that Stewart Brand visited most often, Libre and the Lama Foundation, soon appeared with domes of their own. And in 1970 and 1971, Lloyd Kahn, a coeditor with Brand of several editions of the Catalog; Jay Baldwin; and several other Catalog staffers, used the Catalog’s own production gear to turn out Kahn’s own how-to manuals, Domebook One and Domebook Two.

These books became staples of the Catalog’s “Shelter and Land Use” section. Depicted there and deployed on the communes, domes, like the Whole Earth Catalog itself, became prototypes of a new way of being. If white-collar man was a “square,” domes and their users were well rounded. If the ministrations of hierarchically organized governments and corporations had thrown the earth’s energies out of balance, the dome’s ferociously efficient management of surface tension modeled a world restored to energetic homeostasis. Although domes could be quite large, they could never become the towering skyscrapers of Manhattan or Chicago. They could never dominate a landscape, nor could they be broken up into cubicles. Instead, they could channel the energies of physics into creating glorious “whole” spaces. In their ability to distribute structural tension evenly across a wide area and in their refusal to concentrate it in pillars and pinnacles, Fuller’s domes modeled the sorts of collaborative, distributed power arrangements that characterized the New Communalist ideal. They also modeled a holistic state of mind. Domebook One, for instance, recounts the history of one Swami Kryananda and his search for the proper structure within which to meditate. After trying rectilinear buildings and conventional domes, he concluded that “a geodesic dome is by far the best. It is truly an extension of the mind and resembles . . . our seventh chakra located at the top of our heads.”50

The dome was also an extension of cold war industrial engineering. The Cowboy Nomads of the communes may have lit out for new frontiers, but they did it carrying materials developed within middle-class consumer culture and its military-industrial complex. Lightweight aluminum tubing,

plastic sheeting, even the blueprint for the dome itself—all had first been created or put to use in the sorts of industrial and military institutions the back-to-the-landers were fleeing. At one level, this pattern serves as an example of appropriation. As Kesey and the Pranksters had taken a bus away from schools and used it to “educate” mainstream Americans, or as the members of USCO had transformed the oscilloscopes of industry into tools for the production of mystical multimedia theater, the builders of domes were appropriating a cold war military shelter and redeploying it in a communal context. At another level, though, the communards’ deployment of domes serves as an example of legitimacy exchange. Domes appealed to their builders and users not only for their connotations of holism, but also for their scientism. With their interlinked triangles, each apparently identical to every other but in fact sized slightly differently, domes were futuristic, space-age shelters. They looked nothing like the square shelters of the American past and everything like the sorts that might eventually appear on Mars. The process of building those structures required measuring the various surface parts of the dome to very precise tolerances (without such care, and often even with it, domes leaked). To build and inhabit a dome was not only to enter into contact with mystical systems, or to come closer to personal or transpersonal communion; it was also to play at being an engineer, a scientist, a master of technology.

Domes, then, like backpacks and calculators and many of the other “tools” carried by the Catalog, became terms in a contact language of sorts that was evolving for communication between the world of high technology and the tribes of the New Communalist movement. Domes embodied the counterculture’s critique of hierarchical politics and the celebration of distributed “energy” common to the mythos of LSD and multimedia theater, but also the celebration of form, system, and homeostasis common to cybernetics, population biology, and information theory. In this way, like the Catalog itself, they bridged high science and counterculture. In the Catalog, the products of these worlds might be juxtaposed on a page and the reader might be left to link them as best she could. But in the image of the dome, the reader could see a material example of how such a linking might work. In this sense, the dome was a socio-technical hybrid not unlike Wiener’s anti-aircraft predictor; it was a material device that not only performed some function but also represented an emerging social system. In the case of Wiener’s predictor, that system had brought together soldiers and engineers, the military and industry. In this case, the dome brought to life a system in which representatives of science and the counterculture could congratulate one another for being so forward-thinking. Like other “tools” in the Catalog, the domes represented in Baer’s and Kahn’s books allowed

members of the counterculture to claim some of the force of science for their own pursuits. Think, for instance, of Brand’s description of the Whole Earth as a “research organization.” And they served as important examples of how the products of American science and industry—from camping gear to calculators— could be reconfigured as small-scale devices essential to individual and collective transformation.

Domes also served as sites for face-to-face meetings between members of these communities. Throughout the time he published the Catalog, Brand continued to migrate among the networks it linked. Representatives of some of those groups came together in their own right as well. In March 1969 dome magnate Steve Baer and his colleague Berry Hickman brought together 150 “World thinkers” and “drop outs from specialization” at an abandoned tile factory in the dry hills of New Mexico.51 As Brand pointed out in that month’s Supplement, the factory was strategically located halfway between the nuclear test site at Alamogordo and a Mescalero Apache Indian reservation. Like its location, the gathering, called “Alloy,” was to blend the global perspectives demanded by the nuclear age with the neotribal ethos of the communes. Over the course of three days, conferees gathered in a large white dome and conversed on a series of themes not far from the categories of the Whole Earth Catalog: materials, structure, energy, man, magic, evolution, and consciousness. “If I had to point at one thing that contains what the Catalog is about,” wrote Brand soon after the fact, “it was Alloy.”52

What the Alloy gathering shared with the Whole Earth Catalog was an ability to bring together multiple networks of people, to model an emerging, collaborative way of living and working together, and to do it in a simultaneously high-tech and tribal context. Participants came from Libre, Drop City, and Pacific High School, and from New York, Washington, D.C., and Canada as well. The event was filmed by Robert Frank. In the March 1969 Supplement, Brand devoted eight pages to the conference. In keeping with the Whole Earth’s allegiance to juxtaposition, he mingled comments made by participants with photographs of speakers at the microphone and conferees climbing the uncovered aluminum ribs of the dome. In the pictures one could see the men and women of the New Communalist frontier—young, white, decked out in the jeans and boots that used to mark the working class. One could also see them working with tools—some old, such as hammers and nails; others new and electronic, such as microphones; others futuristic, such as the dome itself. Across these pictures, one could witness a tribe of Fuller’s Comprehensive Designers, taking a global view and acting as local engineers.

Likewise, the comments posted around these pictures made up a collage of rhetoric drawn from systems theory, communal construction projects,

and the countercultural critique of technocracy. “Evolution is any dynamically self-organizing system,” intoned one anonymous commentator. “The process improves itself without external influence.” Another asked, “Am I this 6-foot body or am I something else that could exist beyond it? If we could get enough information maybe we could go beyond the flesh envelope.”53 These comments represented a linking of institutions as well. As Brand pointed out in the Supplement, the speakers quoted included dome builders Kahn and Baer, Dave Evans from SRI, Steve Durkee of the Lama Foundation, and, of course, Brand himself. At Alloy, as in the pages of the Whole Earth Catalog, counterculture and technological culture came together. In the Supplement, the coming together was presented in bits of prose and photography. Like the items offered in the Catalog, these fragments of the Alloy experience were tools for the reader to use as he or she liked. Individually, they offered readers the opportunity to change their minds and to act differently at a local level. Taken together, they offered a textual emblem of a whole, if temporary, system, created for three days in New Mexico. And in that system, readers could glimpse the possibility of an entirely new world system, one in which American industry supplied tools that could be appropriated for purposes of transformation. The tools would be deployed first by an elite and later by the whole population.54

What Wasn’t in the Catalog But what kind of world would this new elite build? To the extent that the Whole Earth Catalog serves as a guide, it would be masculine, entrepreneurial, well-educated, and white. It would celebrate systems theory and the power of technology to foster social change. And it would turn away from questions of gender, race, and class, and toward a rhetoric of individual and small-group empowerment.

Although it was published in the heyday of the Black Panthers and the American Indian Movement, for instance, the Catalog left questions of race unaddressed. Occasionally an African American would peer out from a photograph in the Catalog or the Supplement, but the first attempt to deal with race explicitly did not come until the January 1970 Supplement, with the printing of a “Black Reading List” from Robin’s Distributing Company.55 Few similar items followed. In the fall of 1974, not long after the Catalog had officially ceased publication, Brand did turn over an issue of the magazine that grew out of the Supplement called CoEvolution Quarterly to the Black Panthers to edit as a special issue. The magazine they created simply copied the format of their newsletters, and none of the editors or authors of that issue became regular contributors to Whole Earth productions in later years.

Likewise, for all the talk of cowboys and Indians in the Catalog, real Native Americans were virtually invisible in its pages. Represented by buckskin shirts and moccasins, Indians remained little more than symbols for the tribal, wandering hippies.

Women fared only slightly better. The Women’s Liberation Movement had begun to pick up steam by 1968, but it wasn’t until a series of readers raised the issue of women’s places on rural communes in the July 1970 Supplement that the Whole Earth began to take notice. Even then, its few depictions of women in a politically empowered context were often undercut by their framing. The Last Whole Earth Catalog of 1971, for instance, listed the book Women and Their Bodies (the precursor to Our Bodies, Ourselves) by the Boston Women’s Health Collective. Alongside Diana Shugart’s sensible, straightforward review, it ran two pictures: one of a naked young woman on her back, seen from three or four feet above, and the other, a close up of a child latched onto a young mother’s breast. As his only selection from the book, Brand chose a long passage in which the authors tell women how to masturbate and then enjoined men who might read the passage not to use it “as a marriage manual.”56 Although Women and Their Bodies and Diana Shugart’s review addressed a wide range of women’s health issues, the Catalog’s editors focused narrowly on women’s sexuality.

A similar pattern marred the Catalog’s few references to the Vietnam War. Despite the fact that the years of its publication overlapped the peak of American involvement in Southeast Asia, the Catalog almost completely ignored the conflict. Like Ken Kesey at Vietnam Day in 1965, it turned away from the war and the protestors alike. Only in 1971, long after the Tet Offensive and the My Lai Massacre had undercut the war’s legitimacy, and nearly a year after the National Guard had shot antiwar protestors dead at Kent State, did the Catalog finally list a handful of publications related to left politics, such as Saul Alinsky’s Rules for Radicals and The Organizer’s Manual. What few references to the war appeared before then did little to bring the conflict home to readers. In the spring 1970 edition of the Catalog, for instance, Brand listed Strategy and Tactics magazine and printed an outtake ad for “VIET-NAM”—a board game. “I was once an umpire at a huge war game at Camp Drum, New York, and had a wonderful time,” wrote Brand in his review.57 In the fall 1970 edition, a press photograph of an American combat soldier with the words “MAKE WAR NOT LOVE” penned on his helmet was used to illustrate a review of places where readers could buy government surplus gear. For workingclass American men, going to fight in Vietnam was a real possibility; judging by these listings, for the editor and readers of the Whole Earth Catalog, it was not. The faraway war was of primary interest only insofar as it generated new “tools” for their personal transformation at home.

Occasionally, and particularly in its last two years, the Catalog’s readers and even staffers took the Catalog and the communities it served to task. In the July 1969 Supplement, Brand printed a letter critiquing Buckminster Fuller for allowing only two classes in his work: elite designers and mass consumers. In the same issue, Brand reprinted an article from the San Francisco Good Times describing how commune dwellers in the Southwest had taken advantage of impoverished locals. A year later, Brand printed a letter calling for the Catalog to deal with the social impact of industrialization and capitalism.58 In the January 1970 Supplement, under the headline “Staff Gripe Page,” Brand printed a letter from former Whole Earth staffer Jay Bonner, critiquing the Catalog’s politics from top to bottom.59 “Once,” wrote Bonner, “while working with him on the catalog, I asked Mr. Brand if he would not carry any of a various number of politically oriented underground newspapers. Upon reply he told me that three of the first restrictions he made for the catalog were no art, no religion, no politics.” Bonner then pointed out that Catalog offered all three: the art was fine art or craft; the religion, Eastern; the politics, libertarian. “From all the 128 pages of the Whole Earth Catalog there emerges an unmentioned political viewpoint,” wrote Bonner. “The whole feeling of escapism which the catalog conveys is to me unfortunate.”60

Brand responded with a defense of local action and of his personal experience:

The capitalism question is interesting. I’ve yet to figure out what capitalism is,

but if it’s what we’re doing, I dig it. Oppressed peoples: all I know is that I’ve

been radicalized by working on the Catalog into far more personal involvement

with politics than I had as an artist. My background is pure WASP, wife is

American Indian. Work I did a few years ago with Indians convinced me that

any guilt-based action toward anyone (personal or institutional) can only make

a situation worse. Furthermore the arrogance of Mr. Advantage telling

Mr. Disadvantage what to do with his life is sufficient cause for rage. I ain’t

black, nor poor, nor very native to anyplace, nor eager any longer to pretend

that I am—such identification is good education, but not particularly a good

position for being useful to others. I am interested in the Catalog format being

used for all manner of markets—a black Catalog, a Third World one, whatever,

but to succeed I believe it must be done by people who live there, not well-

meaning outsiders. I’m for power to the people and responsibility to the

people. Responsibility is individual stuff.61

On the one hand, Brand’s response resonates with the countercultural critique of hierarchical politics and with elements of systems theory.

In keeping with Reich’s “Consciousness III,” Brand suggests that top-down politics (i.e., the kind where Mr. Advantage tells Mr. Disadvantage what to do) is bankrupt. The center of change must be the individual, acting with other likeminded individuals. This emphasis on local action echoes the notion of the individual’s local role in maintaining universal systems. By acting on a small scale, the individual can imitate Norbert Wiener’s gunner, adjusting his fire, or Buckminster Fuller’s Designer, turning the energies of the universe to his own purposes. He can thereby change the large-scale system of which he is both a small part and a tiny model. On the other hand, Brand’s response offers a glimpse of the political consequences of this point of view: Indians must work with Indians, the Third World with the Third World, blacks with blacks, and so on. No group should count on help from any other. Everyone is on his own.

Such segregation might seem to conflict with the Whole Earth Catalog’s celebration of “whole” systems. After all, the essence of the Catalog would seem to be the notion that “everything is related.”62 Yet the Catalog is not a collection of everything. Rather, it is a collection of ideas and artifacts then circulating among a limited number of networks, virtually all of whose members were white and relatively young, with a high level of education and easy access to social and financial resources. What relates those items to one another in the Catalog and, to some extent, within the networks concerned, are the universal rhetorical strategies of cybernetics. In the Catalog, local systems mirror global systems, and to act locally is to act as if one had a view of the whole earth. In other words, to master the “system” of one’s Volkswagen engine or to take in the “system” that is the Catalog itself through reading is to imitate the activities of those with command of other, larger systems. It is in fact to act as if one occupied the pinnacles of social, economic, and political power currently dominated by the same technocrats to whose world the New Communalists aimed to find an alternative. Moreover, for the readers of the Catalog, it is to act with the aid of “tools” created by and appropriated from the very technocracy under attack by both the New Communalists and the New Left. In this way the Catalog celebrates not only the counterculture but also the mainstream technocratic culture from which it emerged. And the Catalog replicates mainstream hierarchies of social distinction: from the pages of the Catalog, as from the halls of corporate and government power at the time, people of color, women, and the poor remain largely absent.

Brand’s call for “responsibility to the people,” as well as his Catalog’s turn away from the poor and people of color, reemerged in the Republican political agendas of the late 1980s and early 1990s. The Catalog’s technocentric attitude toward social change, its systems orientation, its preoccupation

with information, and even the cluster of networks it brought together—all became central features of the 1990s debates about networked computing and the “New Economy.” So too did the figure of the Long Hunter. Reconfigured as the hacker, he stepped away once more from the “Mother” country of middle-class life and headed out onto a new technological frontier. That frontier ultimately became incarnated in the term cyberspace, but even then, it continued to look a great deal like the communal frontiers of the late 1960s. Once again, the electronic products of American (and international) industry were taken out of the large institutions in which they first appeared. They were miniaturized, made “personal.” And like the backpacks and calculators of the Whole Earth Catalog, they were claimed as sources of personal and collective transformation.

Brand himself came to have enormous authority in this world, in large part because of the networks and networking practices he developed across the 1960s. By entrepreneurially linking countercultural and technological communities, first in his own travels and later in the pages of the Whole Earth Catalog, Brand allowed the members of those communities to synthesize the ideals and insights of the two worlds. This synthesis generated a social vision in which small-scale informational technologies could be imagined to transform individual minds and, through them, the world. The Whole Earth Catalog presented an informational genre—the network forum—that exemplified that vision. The network forum in turn dramatically amplified the social legitimacy of its founder, Stewart Brand. By 1971 he had been profiled in Time magazine, lauded at the National Book Awards, and celebrated nationwide as a socio-technical visionary. Like P. T. Barnum, he had gathered the performers of his day—the commune dwellers, the artists, the researchers, the dome builders—into a single circus. And he himself had become both master and emblem of its many linked rings.

With the exception of Dave Evans at SRI, and perhaps Bob Albrecht, running his computer education project from the offices of the Portola Foundation, the technologists of the personal computer revolution to come were not core performers in Whole Earth circles. But they were watching, some very closely. On June 21, 1971, Stewart Brand threw a “Demise Party” to celebrate what he thought would be the final edition of the Catalog and the end of the Whole Earth Catalog publishing project. He invited five hundred Whole Earth staffers, readers, and friends to San Francisco’s Palace of Arts and Sciences. He also promised them a “surprise educational event.” At about ninethirty that evening, a procession of entertainers appeared: clowns, trampoline jumpers, belly dancers, and a band called the Golden Toad that played “Irish jigs and Tibetan temple music.”63 The six-foot Brand moved through the crowd barefoot, wearing a black monk’s cassock. At ten-thirty, he

approached the event’s master of ceremonies, Scott Beach, and handed him $20,000 in $100 bills. Beach stepped up to the microphone and explained: “About fifteen minutes ago, Stewart Brand gave me one of the tools that the Whole Earth Catalog has used. This is $20,000, and he gave it to the people here to be used as a tool. . . . Use this as a seed. The Whole Earth Catalog ceases. The seeds have been planted already. Your consensus will decide what will be done with this money. There are microphones, there are causes, there are lots of possibilities.”64 Over the next hour, more than fifty people stepped to the microphone, proposing an equal number of solutions. Brand stood on stage in his monk’s robes, writing down each suggestion on a blackboard. As the evening wore on, the crowd gradually dwindled and so did the cash. By early the next morning, more than $5,000 had simply disappeared. The audience seemed no closer to a solution. Finally, the audience voted to give the remaining $14,905 to one Frederick L. Moore, who promised to put the money in a bank and reconvene the last twenty people at the party in a month to decide what to do with it.

What ultimately became of the money remains unclear, but Moore’s fate does not. In the spring of 1975, along with Gordon French, he founded the Homebrew Computer Club.
