---
book: "From Counterculture to Cyberculture"
author: "Fred Turner"
section_kind: "Ch5"
section: "Virtuality and Community on the WELL"
source_pages: "152-185"
type: source
---

# Virtuality and Community on the WELL

In 1985, nearly twenty years after it first served the back-to-the-land movement, the Whole Earth Catalog became a model for one of the most influential computer networks to date—the Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link (or WELL). Founded by Stewart Brand and computer entrepreneur Larry Brilliant, the WELL was a teleconferencing system within which subscribers could dial up a central computer and type messages to one another in either asynchronous or real-time conversations.1 In its hardware and software it differed little from the many such systems that had begun to appear around the world by this time. But in its membership and its governance, the WELL carried forward a set of ideals, management strategies, and interpersonal networks first formulated in and around the Whole Earth Catalog. Within the WELL’s electronic confines, Stewart Brand brought together former counterculturalists, hackers, and journalists—the same groups he had lately convened at Fort Cronkhite and at the offices of the Whole Earth Software Catalog. These groups collaborated within a network forum that had been shaped by New Communalist and cybernetic ideals. And as they worked together, they established a sense of geographically distributed community much like the one that once united the scattered communes of the back-to-the-land movement.

They did so, however, under radically new economic and technological conditions. In the late 1970s and 1980s, the professional communities of the San Francisco Bay area, where the WELL was located, and especially those associated with digital technology, witnessed an extraordinary rise in networked forms of economic organization and in freelance patterns of employment. For the Bay area’s engineers and symbolic analysts, the WELL became a place to exchange the

information and build the social networks on which their future employment depended.2 In this new climate, notions of consciousness, community, and the socially transformative possibilities of technology associated with the counterculture became key tools with which WELL users managed their economic lives. To its users, the WELL became not simply a computer conferencing system but a way to recreate the countercultural ideal of a shared consciousness in a new “virtual community.” That community in turn was located on what many WELL users imagined to be the digital descendant of the rural American landscape pioneered by the communards of the 1960s, the “electronic frontier.” On the WELL, such terms kept alive a New Communalist vision of sociability and at the same time facilitated the integration of new forms of social and economic exchange into the lives of WELL members. Ultimately, thanks to the work of the many journalists on the system, and particularly the writings of Howard Rheingold and John Perry Barlow, virtual community and electronic frontier became key frames through which Americans would seek to understand the nature of the emerging public Internet.

What Was the WELL? The WELL got its start when Larry Brilliant, founder of Network Technologies International, a company that sold computer conferencing systems, approached Stewart Brand with the notion of putting the Whole Earth Catalog online. Brilliant was looking for a ready-made user community on which to test his latest system, and he believed that in the Whole Earth network, Brand had one.3 Brilliant proposed a partnership: Brilliant would supply a computer and the conferencing software it required. Brand would allow Brilliant to post all of the items in the most recent Whole Earth Catalog online as topics for discussion and let people respond. Whatever profits the system made would be split fifty-fifty with the Point Foundation, nonprofit owner of the Whole Earth publications. Brand accepted the financial arrangement and took day-to-day responsibility for the system. He did not, however, agree to post sections of the Catalog. He argued that, instead, users should be allowed to create their own conversation topics. As he had with the Whole Earth Catalog, Brand hoped to allow the system’s users to converse with one another and to market that conversation back to its participants.4

Although he did not agree to put the Catalog online, Brand did bring two of its essential features to the project: a rich mix of technical, countercultural, and journalistic communities and a management ethos derived from a blend of New Communalist idealism and systems theory. In addition to

readers and staff of the Whole Earth publications, including the Software Catalog, the WELL’s several hundred users in its earliest years comprised a large number of computer technologists (most of them drawn from the Hackers’ Conference).5 There were also staff writers and editors for the New York Times, Business Week, the San Francisco Chronicle, Time, Rolling Stone, Byte, Harper’s, and the Wall Street Journal, as well as numerous freelancers. Some of these journalists, such as the then husband-and-wife team of John Markoff and Katie Hafner, or the Chronicle’s Jon Carroll, were already well known in the Bay area and the Whole Earth community. Others heard about the system and logged on in part to keep an ear to the ground. All of them were offered free accounts on the system—a move that in the long term greatly increased the WELL’s impact on public perceptions of networked computing. Finally, in 1986, disc jockey and Grateful Dead maven David Gans joined the WELL. He brought with him congeries of “Dead Heads,” paying subscribers whose constant conversations about the band were a primary source of income for the WELL for several years.

These multiple, overlapping communities came together, as the readers of the Whole Earth Catalog had before them, in a text-based forum that was designed to be both a business and a community, one that would be governed in a nonhierarchical manner. In 1993 Kevin Kelly, an editor of CoEvolution Quarterly when the WELL was founded and, later, executive editor of Wired, recalled that the WELL team had seven design goals at the start:

1. That it be free. This was a goal, not a commitment. We knew it wouldn’t be

exactly free but it should be as free (cheap) as we could make it. . . .

2. It should be profit making. . . . After much hard, low-paid work by Matthew

and Cliff, this is happening. The WELL is at least one of the few operating

large systems going that has a future.

3. It would be an open-ended universe. . . .

4. It would be self-governing. . . .

5. It would be a self-designing experiment. . . . The early users were to design

the system for later users. The usage of the system would co-evolve with

the system as it was built. . . .

6. It would be a community, one that reflected the nature of Whole Earth publi-

cations. I think that worked out fine.

7. Business users would be its meat and potatoes. Wrong . . .6

As Kelly’s list suggests, the WELL’s early developers built both a countercultural conception of community and a cybernetic vision of control into the system. These were reflected in both the system’s software and its business model. Although today the WELL can be found on the World

Wide Web, when it first went online in 1985, it was a bulletin board system (BBS) running on a finicky, Unix-based program called PicoSpan. Housed on a single computer located in the Sausalito offices of the Whole Earth Software Review, it allowed people to dial in with a modem. Once connected, users typed in their login names and a password and called up a long string of conference names.7 Grouped into broad categories, such as “Arts and Letters” and “Entertainment,” the conferences dealt with themes ranging from books and cooking to computing and the Grateful Dead. The user could then type a single command and the name of the conference; once “inside,” she would find a series of numbered “topics,” each created by a user and each representing an ongoing, asynchronous conversation. She could then post her own comment in the conversation or, if she liked, start another topic. From a technical point of view, PicoSpan was not unique. Like other conferencing software of the time, it mapped a tree of information in a hierarchy extending from the system level down through the conference level to individual topics. Yet, to its users, the system seemed to offer an extraordinary and familiar flexibility. Just as readers of the Whole Earth Catalog skipped from “Whole Systems” to “Nomadics,” linking their reading as they went, so the users of the WELL could move from topic to topic, jumping in and out at will, creating their own conversations if they wished.

Like the Whole Earth Catalog, the WELL marketed its users’ contributions back to those same users, but it did so under very different terms than the ones used by competitors such as Prodigy or General Electric’s GEnie system. For commercial systems of the mid-1980s, computer conferencing was only one of a number of services offered. These companies saw themselves as information utilities, and they saw computer networks less as a site for peer-to-peer communication than as a new medium for the delivery of information. In 1985, for instance, the largest such system, CompuServe, offered its more than two hundred thousand subscribers access to e-mail, special-interest discussion groups, and a real-time chat network designed to emulate Citizens’ Band radio, which was then popular. Such communication features were heavily outnumbered, however, by the system’s facilities for the delivery of news and information. In CompuServe’s databases, users could access news from the Associated Press, an array of electronic newspapers, health information written by doctors, and all sorts of up-to-theminute financial news.8 On CompuServe and elsewhere, developers largely treated information as a commodity to be exchanged and users as consumers of information goods.

When their users did produce information goods, commercial systems often tried to capture whatever value they might have. Many commercial systems in the mid-1980s claimed copyright on every word posted to them.

On the WELL, in contrast, the first log-in screen one encountered reminded users: “You own your own words. This means that you are responsible for the words that you post on the WELL and that reproduction of those words without your permission in any medium outside of the WELL’s conferencing system may be challenged by you, the author.” As he told Katie Hafner, Brand established this policy largely to prevent the WELL from being held liable for its users’ postings.9 But the policy also reflected the WELL’s origins in the Whole Earth Catalog and the New Communalist movement. Even as it marked the fact that users’ words could be transformed into commodities for exchange, it also suggested that the information they provided belonged to them in a more essential way. Information on the WELL was not merely an object of exchange, but a representation of its creator’s consciousness.

The WELL’s early managers sought to govern their emerging network in terms set by the countercultural critique of hierarchy and the Whole Earth Catalog’s trust in the power of tools. They refrained from intervening in fractious debates whenever possible. Although the WELL’s member agreement gave conference hosts and the system’s owners the power to remove members from the system, managers used that power only three times in the system’s first six years, and each time they later allowed the member they had removed to return.10 Rather than assert their authority directly, the WELL’s early managers chose to give users the power of self-rule through information technology. Members who did not like one another’s postings, for example, could erase them from their own screens—though not from the community as a whole—by using a “Bozo filter” program within PicoSpan. Likewise, members who later regretted their own postings could return to the system and erase them wholesale using a “Scribble” feature.

This technocentric form of management brought together the New Communalist preference for nonhierarchical forms of social organization with a cybernetic vision of control. The WELL’s subscription rates, for instance, remained substantially below those of their commercial competitors not simply for commercial reasons, but because they served as a way for Brand and others to shape interpersonal relations on the WELL. Brand knew that the high cost of other systems had caused their users to post long, carefully crafted messages and to quickly exit the system. He worried, though, that if the WELL cost “nothing per hour” to use, “then the rap dominators would be motivated to really take over.” As a result, he decided to charge users an eight-dollar subscription fee and two dollars per hour to log in—far less than the twenty-five dollars per hour of use that other systems were charging at the time. “Subscription, I knew, was a model of pay for free-seeming information that really worked,” Brand later told Katie Hafner. “At that rate people could forget they were WELL members and not

be stricken when they noticed their bill six months later. Often it would revive their interest in getting their money’s worth.”11

As he set subscription rates, Brand was helping to lay down boundary conditions for a self-governing system. Like a communard of the late 1960s, he was working to establish a forum in which individuals could express themselves and form an alternative community of kindred souls. Like a cybernetician, however, he was also designing a recursive, self-sustaining experiment. The WELL was to be the socio-technical equivalent of a homeostat. Once set in motion by its creators, it was to learn as it went, to find its ideal temperature, so to speak, through the actions of its constituent parts. In this sense, like the soldiers operating Wiener’s anti-aircraft system, and like the fantasy citizens of O’Neill’s space colonies of 1975, the users of the WELL were to become simultaneously themselves and circuits in a selfregulating biotechnological system. Machine and man would coevolve, to the benefit of each and of the system as a whole. That coevolution would take place simultaneously in the interpersonal, electronic, and economic realms. At the social and electronic levels, the system itself would be part of the circuit. That is, archived in bits, arrayed in conferences and discussion threads, the WELL, like the Whole Earth Catalog, would serve as a record and a map of community interactions. Like elements of a homeostat, individuals could monitor that text and reshape it by means of future interactions. This process would also serve as a business model. As Cliff Figallo, one of the WELL’s early hosts and leaders, explained, “The discussion and dialog contained and archived on the WELL are its primary products. The WELL ‘sells its users to each other’ and it considers its users to be both its consumers and its primary producers.”12

Throughout the WELL’s early years, these systemic embodiments of the Whole Earth ethos, coupled with the lived countercultural experience of many WELL members, suggested that computer networks might bring back to life the New Communalist dream of a community of shared consciousness. Ramón Sender Barayón, who had helped Stewart Brand dream up the 1966 Trips Festival, joined the WELL early on, he said, in part because “I felt the energies on the WELL. It reminded me of the Open Land communes I’d been to in the 1960s. The tribal need is one our culture doesn’t recognize; capitalism wants each of us to live in our own little cubicle, consuming as much as possible. The WELL took that need and said, ‘Hey, let’s see what happens if we become a disembodied tribe.’” This was especially true for the WELL’s first managers. Soon after he and Brilliant established the WELL, Stewart Brand turned over day-to-day management of the system to the Whole Earth Catalog’s former typesetter, Matthew McClure. McClure hired John Coate as the WELL’s marketing director, and when

McClure left the WELL in 1986, he hired Cliff Figallo to join Coate in directing the system. McClure, Coate, and Figallo were all long-time veterans of the Farm, a commune set on 1,750 hardscrabble acres in Summertown, Tennessee. The Farm had been founded by Stephen Gaskin, a former professor of English at San Francisco State University who, in the late 1960s, preached in an open forum known as Monday Night Class. His lectures there focused on psychedelic drugs and world religion and included a heavy dose of mysticism. When he and about 250 followers established their commune in 1971, they hoped to create a community of total interpersonal openness. As Coate remembered it, the Farm was a “mental nudist colony.” Members were encouraged to work toward a state of transpersonal union of the kind some had felt on LSD. Figallo recalled that “extending the visions of the psychedelic world into the straight everyday world was one of the foundations of Stephen’s teachings.” In that context, members were encouraged to challenge one another, to “get into” one another’s “thing,” so as to make it possible to drop their personal defenses and become part of a transcendent collective. “We were trying to be tribal,” Coate explained. “To get back to something that white Euro/American culture had lost. . . . That’s what all that ‘getting straight’ and ‘sorting it out’ was about. Trying to get real close real fast, so we can get on with the trip.”13

Although some of its members still live there, the Farm as McClure, Coate, and Figallo knew it collapsed in 1983. Burdened by debts and no longer comfortable with the extraordinary authority exerted by Stephen Gaskin, its members voted that year to stop pooling all their resources communally and to reorganize as a cooperative to which individual members paid dues.14 Less than two years after the Farm ceased to be structured as a commune, its ethos of disembodied community found a home on the WELL. Like the Farm, and like the Whole Earth Catalog, the WELL was a community held together by talk, the textual mirror of a physically dispersed tribe that felt itself linked by a shared invisible energy. As Figallo explained, “We [veterans of the Farm] were conditioned to respond to the Community Imperative—the need to build and maintain relationships between people and to preserve the structure that supported those relationships. I also became aware . . . that those relationships were the only ‘product’ we had to sell.”15

At the same time, even for the former citizens of the Farm, the WELL became a system to be managed according to a mix of cybernetic principles. On the WELL, human and technical systems existed simultaneously in interaction with one another and, at a theoretical level at least, as mirrors of one another. The manager, like the scientist in a first-generation cybernetic experiment, was to set the boundary conditions for the system and then to stand back and observe its operation. Within the framework of

second-generation cybernetics brought into the Whole Earth network by Gregory Bateson, however, the observer was always part of the system being observed. On the WELL, McClure, Figallo, and Coate balanced both traditions, playing the roles of designer, observer, and participant simultaneously and drawing on both cybernetic and communal models in their management practice. Cliff Figallo explained: “Principles of tolerance and inclusion, fair resource allocation, distributed responsibility, management by example and influence, a flat organizational hierarchy, cooperative policy formulation and acceptance of a libertarian-bordering-on-anarchic ethos were all carryovers from our communal living experience.”16 Yet these principles were also key elements in the management of a pseudobiological system. The WELL, according to Figallo, was “like a small balanced social ecology”; it was a “pond” that “seems to renew itself in spite of continuing technical and interpersonal difficulties.”17 The first job of the managers was to set the conditions of the “environment.” “My main emphasis,” recalled Figallo, “was in preserving and supporting the exercise of freedom and creativity by the WELL’s users through providing an open forum for their interaction.” McClure agreed: “I don’t think we had an a priori knowledge of exactly what it was going to turn out to be, but we had a pretty good idea about what its potential was and how to manipulate it into realizing that potential. And a lot of that manipulation was by staying the hell out of the way at the right time. The WELL didn’t just evolve, it evolved because we designed it to evolve.”18

In both its original business plan and its day-to-day management, then, the WELL owed a great deal to the legacy of the Whole Earth Catalog and its synthesis of New Communalist and cybernetic ideals. The WELL as described by Kelly, McClure, Figallo, and Coate was a little, self-contained world, and its managers, like scientists, were “as gods”— designing that world, channeling its disembodied “energies” through talk, creating settings in which individuals could simultaneously build their new community and transform themselves by using a new set of digital “tools” to which the WELL had given them access. They and the WELL carried the Catalog’s countercultural critique of hierarchical government and its celebration of cybernetic forms of collaborative organization forward from the counterculture into what was quickly becoming a world of individuals and organizations linked by networks of computers—a cyberculture.

New Technological and Economic Networks That cyberculture depended on a new set of economic and technological arrangements, however. In the 1960s, mainstream economic life had been dominated by hierarchically organized corporations; it was that world that

members of the New Communalist movement had set out to escape. By the time the WELL was created, the world had changed dramatically. As a variety of economic sociologists have noted, the mid-1980s saw hierarchical firms in many industries and several nations reorganize themselves as projectoriented networks.19 They laid off workers, broke component elements of firms into semi-independent project teams, and decentralized their management structure. Out of this process emerged what Walter Powell has described as a new, networked logic for the organization of production, a logic characterized by a shift in the basis of employment from long-term positions to shorter-term projects, by the leveling of corporate hierarchies, and by the integration of activities across multiple industries. Within this logic, the boundaries that had previously surrounded firms and jobs became porous and flexible. Companies became collections of internal networks even as their constituent units reached out and joined networks that reached across traditional lines between firms, industries, and nations. For an increasing number of workers, employment meant not only performing particular tasks within the company, but helping to build and maintain interfirm networks.20 In part, this networking helped to build alliances for one’s firm. For some employees, though, it also helped mitigate the new insecurity of their jobs. Corporations were coming increasingly to the view expressed by James Meadows, vice president for human resources at AT&T, in 1996: “People need to look at themselves as self-employed, as vendors who come to the company to sell their skills. In AT&T, we have to promote the concept of the whole work force being contingent, though most of our contingent workers are inside our walls. Jobs are being replaced by projects and fields of work, giving rise to a society that is increasingly ‘jobless but not workless.’”21

This situation was particularly true for the early users of the WELL. As Manuel Castells has pointed out, the electronics industry and its geographical hubs, including the San Francisco Bay area, were among the industries and regions most dependent on network patterns of organization.22 In Silicon Valley, these networks had been coming together for decades. It is tempting to ascribe the rise of network organizations to the rise of networked communication technologies, but in the case of Silicon Valley, at least, it would be inaccurate to do so: there, the increase in networked forms of doing business preceded and in fact helped drive the development of the technologies on which systems like the WELL depended.23 The Valley had been a center for electronics research since the early twentieth century. After World War II, much of that research was supported by contracts from the Defense Department. For example, virtually every integrated circuit made in the Valley in the early 1960s was installed in a Polaris or Minuteman

missile system, and through much of the 1960s, the Valley’s largest employer was Lockheed Missiles and Space (now Lockheed-Martin). Nevertheless, much of the region’s technological innovation was driven by collaborations between local technology firms and Stanford University. During World War II, Stanford’s future dean of engineering, Frederick Terman, had headed the Radio Research Laboratory, a spin-off from MIT’s Rad Lab. In Cambridge, he had caught a glimpse of the possibilities for military, industrial, and academic collaboration, and when he returned to Stanford, he brought that vision with him. Throughout the late 1940s and 1950s, Terman worked to integrate the region’s engineering culture with the academic aims of the university and to coordinate both with the tactical goals of the Defense Department.24

By the early 1970s, Terman’s collaborative style had become a Valleywide norm. As AnnaLee Saxenian has shown, the technical industries of the Valley at that time enjoyed a uniquely integrated culture. Social distinctions and institutional hierarchies common to other regions played little role in Valley life. This was especially true within the firms that would define the Valley’s computer industry. In 1957, for instance, Robert Noyce, the first CEO of Fairchild Semiconductor, did away with many of the privileges characteristic of more hierarchical firms. He and his fellow managers decreed that the parking lot would be first-come, first-serve, that dress codes would not include coats and ties, and that engineers who found themselves in meetings with their formal superiors would be encouraged to speak their minds. Engineers from Fairchild went on to form more than fifty companies in the Valley, most all of which retained Noyce’s antihierarchical social style.25 Thanks largely to the absence of such distinctions, social and professional networks extended across local institutions, industries, and corporations. Over the next decade, as the personal-computer industry grew and the role of military sponsorship of electronics declined, those networks became increasingly important. By 1984 Silicon Valley’s economy had become the fastest-growing and wealthiest in the United States. Between 1986 and 1990, the region saw the value of its electronics firms grow by $25 billion; by contrast, the Route 128 area of Massachusetts, a region endowed with similar industries but more hierarchical patterns of social and professional life, saw growth of just $1 billion.26

Within the Bay area’s computer industries, the rapid growth, coupled with the constantly changing demands of technical work in this period, helped drive extraordinary professional mobility. Job tenure for Silicon Valley engineers and managers in the early 1980s averaged two to three years; turnover among manual laborers was even more rapid. In such a fluid employment environment, individuals cultivated professional and

interpersonal networks as key sources of future employment. “A company is just a vehicle which allows you to work,” explained one engineer. Even though individual employers came and went, strong networks allowed the engineers and managers of Silicon Valley to keep working steadily over time.27 Throughout its early years, the WELL population included large numbers of users from the growing computer industry. Most of its members hailed from the San Francisco Bay and Silicon Valley areas. Moreover, its contributors included a substantial number of professionals from other industries that had long depended on networks, including academe, journalism, and consulting. For these users, the WELL offered an electronic forum in which they could meet, exchange information, build reputations, and collaborate.

This sort of exchange was nothing new to the Whole Earth network. The Whole Earth Catalog had long served as a site where members of various local communities could speak up, either by writing letters or by reviewing products, and in so doing they contributed to and asserted their own membership in the geographically distributed network of counterculturalists. The Catalog had appeared no more than twice a year, however, with two supplements per year published in the interim. As a paper-and-ink publication, it cost a great deal of time, labor, and money to produce and distribute. The digital forum of the WELL, in contrast, allowed for instantaneous postings. If the Catalog had represented a community in print, the WELL’s digital technology allowed it to become an interactive collectivity in real time. This fact shaped the roles individuals could have in regard to the system. At the Catalog, individuals could review products, write letters, and perhaps join the editorial staff. But because of the production technologies involved, they could assume only one role at a time, a role that would be permanently fixed in the pages of the Catalog. At the WELL, individuals could adopt one persona in one conference and another elsewhere. They could post in several places, serve as a host to a conference, and start a new topic—all within a single hour. The WELL therefore often became intertwined with its users’ daily lives in a way that no paper-bound catalog could. Maria Syndicus, an early and prominent WELL member, explains: “I’d be in the office, working, and at the same time, posting in conferences, sending email, and having a conversation in Sends [an early instant-messaging feature on the WELL]. I’d be at home, cooking dinner, and logging on to check what was new. Relationships developed fast and furious, ideas spread like wildfire. I never laughed so hard, argued so passionately, soaked up so many new ideas. The WELL made me run on high.”28

As Syndicus’s post suggests, the WELL’s digital networks also offered women a prominence that that they had generally not enjoyed in the

counterculture or at the Whole Earth Catalog. On the rural communes of the late 1960s, women had often been confined to support roles: cooking, cleaning, and the raising of children. On the WELL, they could and did slide across such gender divides. In the late 1980s, some 40 percent of WELL users were women.29 Although top managers of the system in its earliest years were male, as were a number of the most frequent users of public forums, women also played strong leadership roles, establishing conferences, starting topics, and participating in a wide range of discussions.

These expanding roles of women reflected the rise of feminism throughout American culture, of course. Yet they also marked the empowerment felt by women on the WELL. In 1993, for example, scholar Susan Herring circulated a paper in which she argued that men and women displayed different online communication styles and that these differences tended to put women at a disadvantage online. When the paper made its way to the WELL, it helped spark a two-year debate on the experiences of women online.30 In the course of that debate, women mentioned that they had at times received harassing e-mails and unwanted sexual approaches from men on the WELL. But on the whole, they rejected Herring’s contention that a distinctly female posting style existed and its implication that women endured the same pressures online that they encountered elsewhere. Many argued that an aggressive verbal style of the kind Herring ascribed to men would cause problems for any WELL user, male or female. And several pointed out that the WELL’s many conferences and the system’s ability to filter incoming messages, as well as the availability and sensitivity of its managers and conference hosts, made it relatively easy not only to avoid harassment, but to find congenial settings for conversation.

One of the most powerful of these forums was the women-only conference Women on the WELL. Started soon after the WELL itself began, the conference required prospective contributors to speak directly to one of its hosts to confirm their female identity before they were admitted. Once inside the conference, women discussed a wide range of topics. Elizabeth Reba Wiese, in her introduction to Wired Women, an early and influential collection of essays on the roles of women online, recalled that she joined Women on the WELL (WOW) soon after taking an isolating thirdshift editorial job. When she logged on in the middle of the night, she found the discussions of the conference waiting for her “like a letter on the kitchen table”:

I came in to the community with a cry of pain, feeling alone and bereft, and

these women I did not know sat down beside me and offered comfort, told

their own stories of break-ups and partings, of finding their way in a new city,

of making a life where you did not have one before. . . . I learned a lot in my

late-night sojourns to the WELL. I who had few heterosexual friends met hap-

pily married women. I listened in as women with experiences vastly different

from mine discussed blending families, tax law, how much to tip in a hotel,

what it had meant to come of age in the sixties and how to cope when one’s

parents died. . . . In a way, the WELL, and WOW in particular, was like being

given the gift of an extended family.31

The WELL as Economic Heterarchy Together, changes in media technology and in the economic landscape in which WELL users worked substantially changed the nature and value of both information and information-based interpersonal connection. During the late 1960s, when the Whole Earth Catalog first appeared, the American economy was strong and long-term employment prospects were good, particularly for the largely upper-middle-class, college-educated readership of the Catalog. Many of those who struck out for the woods in 1968 did so knowing full well they would have something to go back to if they had to. Moreover, although its recommendations certainly had value for its readers, and although its recommenders could build a reputation in part by reviewing for it, the Whole Earth Catalog was published too infrequently and at too great an expense to be a source of rapid information exchange. Reviewers were paid ten dollars for a published piece, but almost all of the financial value generated by the information contributed to the Whole Earth Catalog returned to the Catalog’s publishers.32

On the WELL, by contrast, it was possible to exchange smaller, timesensitive pieces of information. They could range from data on a not-yetannounced technology to a bit of gossip about the computer or magazine industries. This sort of information could have a great deal of value to the many information professionals on the WELL. Furthermore, because the WELL facilitated numerous, rapid interactions—as opposed to the printing of single, carefully crafted letters in the Whole Earth Catalog—it also allowed individuals to get to know the working styles of one another’s minds in a way that was not possible in a paper-and-ink forum. This feature added a new dimension to the ways in which the forum could enhance the reputations of its users. Whereas in the Whole Earth Catalog, regular reviewers could establish reputations for know-how and, to some extent, for prose technique and taste, on the WELL, contributors were able to build reputations for these things and, beyond them, for charisma, personality, and style. The Whole Earth Catalog concentrated a wealth of countercultural experiences into a single publication that could be purchased, with the purchase

price returning to the publisher. The WELL tended to push value out to its users, to distribute and increase value throughout the system.

On the WELL, the boundary between public and private was extraordinarily fluid. As a result, any given contribution to a WELL conference might have value simultaneously in multiple domains— collective, interpersonal, and economic. For many users, these domains met in the exchange of information. Like the Whole Earth Catalog, the WELL made visible a wealth of interesting facts and a network of experts who supplied them. By making both facts and experts available in real time, however, the WELL substantially increased the value of each. Reva Basch, a former librarian and at the time a professional freelance researcher, offered a sense of this value when she explained how she used the WELL in 1991:

Although it doesn’t host any of the formal databases that I use for research,

The WELL *is* the online hangout of choice for an incredible array of experts:

multi-media artists, musicians, newspaper columnists, neurobiologists, radio

producers, futurists, computer junkies. I can contact any of them directly,

through email, or post a plea for information in a public conference and more

often than not, be deluged with insights and informed opinions. Most com-

pellingly, the conferences devoted to non-work issues and to fun and nonsense

give me a chance to get to know these folks better, and vice versa.33

For Basch, as for the many other information professionals on the WELL, the system offered access to information and expertise that could be transformed into income elsewhere. Howard Rheingold, for instance, had been a freelance journalist and author for a half dozen years before he joined the WELL. He found that the WELL extended the range of his social networks and his ability to find information quickly. “An editor or producer or client can call and ask me if I know much about the Constitution, or fiber optics, or intellectual property,” Rheingold wrote in 1992. “‘Let me get back to you in twenty minutes,’ I say, reaching for the modem.” These rapid and diverse connections amplified Rheingold’s income. In a WELL topic devoted to the ways in which the WELL had improved members’ work lives, entitled “De WELL Been Beddy, Beddy Goot to Me,” Rheingold wrote that the WELL had supplied him with important information and key collaborators. As a result, he said, “I probably make more money from work that I do with the help of the WELL and the WELL community than I made from all sources before I joined.”34

The exchange of information was by no means the only source of economic value on the early WELL. Revisiting the accounts of other members reveals at least two other forms: performance value and reputation value.

Carmen Hermosillo, for instance, writing under the name humdog, contributed to the WELL for several years and, like many other members, engaged in several emotionally charged debates. Toward the end of her time on the system, she later wrote, she began to feel that she had been performing rather than conversing: “i have seen many people spill their guts on-line, and i did so myself until, at last, i began to see that i had commodified myself. . . . i created my interior thoughts as a means of production for the corporation that owned the board i was posting to, and that commodity was being sold to other commodity/consumer entities as entertainment.” Even though the WELL never made much of a profit, and although its managers in fact struggled to keep the system in the black, Hermosillo’s point has been echoed elsewhere. John Coate described the experience of writing on the WELL as “a new hybrid that is both talking and writing yet isn’t completely either one. It’s talking by writing.” Despite being text-based, contributions to the WELL constituted a kind of vocal performance—a performance that many subscribed to the system in part to attend.35

The value to others of one’s performance did not necessarily depend on one’s reputation. Like users of many emerging media forms today, such as reality television or the World Wide Web, many WELL clients watched others act out their own lives online and paid the WELL’s owners for the privilege. Yet (though it didn’t have to) a well-managed performance could also enhance the performer’s reputation. As Coate put it, “Freelancers, contractors, entrepreneurs, and others who, because they are always looking ahead to that next job, need to have their shingle hung out . . . With so many people moving from one job to another, online public forums are good places to run into others who may lead you to your next work opportunity.” A journalist who wrote with flair in a conference unrelated to his professional specialty could be noticed and contacted for work elsewhere. Reva Basch recalled that Jon Carroll, a columnist for the San Francisco Chronicle, spotted her writing on the WELL. When he went on vacation, he suggested to his editors that Basch and several other WELL members fill in for him. Basch’s affectionate description of her Apple PowerBook in the Chronicle led to a regular and high-paying column with a Ziff-Davis publication, Computer Life.36

This pattern was common on the WELL. Online contributions in social and special-interest conferences led to work for Howard Rheingold, for his equally well-known colleague on the WELL, John Perry Barlow, and in later years for many others. Nonjournalists benefited in the same way. A computer programmer who built a functional bit of software for the WELL could have his or her skills recognized within the group and later elsewhere too. According to Coate, these migrations of reputation occurred frequently

in the late 1980s.37 Such reputation work ultimately led to a number of collaborations that had a substantial impact on the early culture of the public Internet, including the founding of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Salon magazine, and even Wired.

This is not to say that journalists who posted witty responses to queries or programmers who built new tools were doing so in pursuit of economic gain. On the contrary, it seems clear that many were acting from a mixture of motives and in a mixture of social contexts simultaneously. Sociologist David Stark has explained that such mixtures are characteristic of emerging forms of postindustrial economic activity. In an influential study of firms in post-Soviet Eastern Europe, Stark christened this sort of mixture “heterarchy.”38 Within a heterarchy, he explained, one encounters multiple, and at times competing, value systems, principles of organization, and mechanisms for performance appraisal: “Heterarchies create wealth by inviting more than one way of evaluating worth.”39 In the post-Soviet context, for example, if a particular unit of a firm could be characterized simultaneously as a “public” resource and as the “private” property of a newly deregulated company, it could attract funds from both the public and private sectors and share financial risks between them as well.40

On the WELL, users’ abilities to characterize their postings as having value in both the social and the economic registers depended on both the computer technology of the WELL and the cultural legacy of the New Communalist movement. By allowing users to communicate in real time and by allowing them to start and end topics more or less at will, the technology of the WELL made it possible for individual communications to have meaning and value in registers that contributions to the Whole Earth Catalog never could, simply because of the mechanics involved in producing a bound paper document.41 Alongside these technical affordances, however, the WELL depended on a set of cultural tools that it had inherited from the American counterculture, and specifically from the Whole Earth Catalog. In the Catalog, readers contributed letters and product reviews primarily because they supported and wanted to contribute to the geographically distributed alternative culture they saw emerging in its pages. No one could make a living—or even a substantial part of a living—writing for the Catalog. Readers offered contributions as gifts to the community that the Catalog made visible; the Catalog then retailed those gifts (albeit at a low per-unit cost) to readers.

Thanks to shifts in technology and in the San Francisco Bay area’s economy, the nature and value of the information exchanged on the WELL was qualitatively different. Yet WELL members retained two conceptual frameworks from the Catalog era with which to explain their interactions online:

the “gift economy” and the notion of a community of linked minds. As Howard Rheingold explained it, the WELL’s gift economy consisted of the constant exchange of potentially valuable information without expectation of immediate reward.42 Individuals contributed information to such a system, wrote Rheingold, because those who contributed would ultimately be rewarded with information themselves over time. This pattern of giving without expectation of immediate reward had deep roots in the San Francisco Bay area counterculture; for Rheingold and others, it was this pattern that distinguished the sorts of information exchange happening in places like the WELL from those of ordinary, cash-and-carry markets.43 As several generations of sociologists and anthropologists have pointed out, though, a gift economy is not simply a system for the exchange of valuable goods. It is also a system for the establishment of social order.44 Marcel Mauss argued in The Gift, his classic study of exchange relations in pre-industrial societies, that there is no such thing as a “pure gift.” Gifts entail obligations and generate cycles of exchange that serve to establish and maintain structural relations between givers and receivers. Moreover, as Mauss suggested, the gift itself never stands outside social or economic relations. The gift encodes multiple social and economic meanings. Pierre Bourdieu has argued that these multiple meanings are an “open secret” to participants in the system. Within the gift itself and within cycles of giving and receiving, the multiple meanings work to transform material wealth into social capital.45

Their power depends on the ability of the “gift” to connect the economic work being undertaken to other forms of social interaction. On the WELL, it was the rhetoric of community that allowed this connection to be made. Rheingold asserted that the success of the informational gift economy on the WELL depended not only on the expectation of ultimate reward, but also on an intangible feeling that one was working to construct a new sort of social collective. In a gift economy, “people do things for one another out of a spirit of building something between them, rather than a spreadsheetcalculated quid pro quo. When that spirit exists, everybody gets a little extra something, a little sparkle, from their more practical transactions; different kinds of things become possible when this mindset pervades. Conversely, people who have valuable things to add to the mix tend to keep their heads down and their ideas to themselves when a mercenary or hostile zeitgeist dominates an online community.”46 In Rheingold’s terms, the felt existence of community allowed individuals to exchange information without fearing that they might never see a return for their gifts. But as David Stark saw it, the ability of an information giver to characterize his “gift” as a valuable piece of information (in the economic register), as a demonstration of personal style (in the interpersonal register), and as a contribution to the

building of a community (in the social register) allowed the information exchange to go forward in the first place. Thus, the rhetoric of community provided the ideological cover necessary to transform a potentially stark and single-minded market transaction into a complex, multidimensional act. To the extent that they could describe themselves as the givers and receivers of informational gifts within a community, members of the WELL could simultaneously recognize and ignore the degree to which they were also exchanging financially valuable goods within a newly informational economy. As a result, they could increase their own social capital and their access to the informational and social resources on which their work off-line depended.

On the WELL, this heterarchical form of information work came together with the experience of interpersonal intimacy. Under the rubric of a New Communalist vision of a community of consciousness, this blend of emotional interconnection and informational labor gave rise to one of the most influential frames with which we have since understood the Internet: virtual community. Through PicoSpan’s stark white-on-black, text-only interface, the early users of the WELL told jokes, congratulated one another on life events, and recounted long parts of their personal histories. Soon the conversation spilled over into face-to-face gatherings called WELL Office Parties (WOPs). The first WOP took place in the WELL’s Sausalito offices, around the computer that hosted the conversations; later events were located across the Bay area.47 The face-to-face meetings sealed emotional bonds formed earlier online. The resulting strong interpersonal bonds were further strengthened by the history so many WELL members shared. Often, WELL members addressed that history directly, establishing topics of discussion such as “Memories on Morning Star [commune] in 1967” or just “Communes,” in which they recalled their experiences in the 1960s and 1970s.48 Even when they turned to more contemporary subjects, users of the WELL in the late 1980s and early 1990s could assume a more or less shared set of experiences and interests with other WELL users. The Grateful Dead, sexuality, information work, parenting—all were the subjects of extensive conferences online, and all reflected the shared generational experiences of early WELL users.

These shared interests, experiences, and emotional interconnections helped drive the dissemination of the notion that WELL constituted a virtual community. Although some users insisted that the WELL could best be compared to a “pub” or a “virtual coffee house,” both contemporary accounts and online archives suggest that the notion of “community” was the most commonly used metaphor with which WELL users tried to name the whole of their experiences on the system. At one level, the rhetoric of

community summoned up the back-to-the-land movement as a way to name the emotional intimacy many had experienced online. At another, the vision of the WELL as a community of shared consciousness also embraced the vicissitudes of the newly networked economy in which members found themselves living. John Coate put the point succinctly: “Professional and personal interactions overlap” on the WELL. For that reason, he wrote, the WELL could be compared to a village, “because that’s what a village is: a place where you go down to the butcher or the blacksmith and transact your business, and at night meet those same neighbors down at the local tavern or the Friday night dance.”49

The WELL’s membership included few if any butchers or blacksmiths. By describing the WELL as a village, however, Coate and others enabled WELL users to reflect on their shared countercultural history, to celebrate their intense interpersonal connection online, and to transform both into resources for the amplification of social and material capital. To the extent that its members could imagine the WELL as a community, they could speak within multiple registers simultaneously, building their reputations, their friendships, and their businesses. They could also do so in the comforting sense that they had not betrayed their youthful ambitions for alternative community. The communes of the 1960s had largely vanished, but in John Coate’s description of a pre-industrial village, we can hear echoes of the kind of community the Farm hoped to be and the kind of community the Whole Earth Catalog aimed to speak to. This time, though, New Communalist ideals no longer offered an alternative to life in the economic mainstream. On the contrary, they provided a vision by which to steer one’s way through the complex currents of the increasingly mainstream network economy.

Exporting the Virtual Community Frame Not long after that vision emerged on the WELL, Howard Rheingold transported it into wider regions of public discourse. In 1987, in a brief article for the Whole Earth Review, successor to the by-then-defunct CoEvolution Quarterly, Rheingold deployed the term virtual community for what was almost certainly the first time in print. In a subsequent 1992 essay and in his 1993 book The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier, he described the new forms of interaction that computers made possible: Gathered together online, yet restricted to text-only interfaces, individuals could connect to one another without encountering body-based forms of prejudice. They could come together not in the random interactions that characterized life in the material world, but by choice, around shared

interests. And within this space, they could engage in a new form of social interaction that was simultaneously intimate and instrumental.50 Invoking both the countercultural ideals of cooperation and the cybernetic vision of humans and computers as collaborating information systems, Rheingold explained in 1987 that members of his “virtual community” acted as “software agents” for one another, becoming “effective filters for sifting the key data that are useful and interesting to us as individuals.”51

Even as they helped one another perform information-oriented work, though, the members of the WELL were also working to restore the New Communalist dream of a rural community of like-minded souls, suggested Rheingold. “We need computer networks to recapture the sense of cooperative spirit that so many people seemed to lose when we gained all this technology,” he wrote in 1993. In the disembodied precincts of computermediated communication, people could “rediscover the power of cooperation, turning cooperation into a game, a way of life—a merger of knowledge capital, social capital, and communion.”52 Rheingold’s vision of a collaborative virtual community not only echoed the goals of commune builders from the late 1960s, but also represented a transformation in the countercultural critique of technocracy. Like early 1960s critics of the cold war militaryindustrial complex, Rheingold critiqued the loss of cooperative spirit and implied that technology itself had brought about that loss. And, not unlike the reversionary technophiles of the Whole Earth Catalog, Rheingold trusted in tools to restore the cooperative spirit and to put cooperation once again at the center of social life. He believed the computer was a tool that could transform the consciousness of its user and so allow the user to enter into new, alternative, and exemplary community with others. But, unlike the hammers and books of the Whole Earth Catalog, the computer network that was the WELL was not simply a hand tool. It was also a system, albeit one to which an individual computer could grant access. In keeping with Stewart Brand’s celebration of space colonies, and with Gregory Bateson’s view of the world as an all-inclusive information system, Rheingold represented the information network of the WELL as an all-inclusive, collaborative, emotionally and materially sustaining world.

Almost immediately after the publication of his 1993 book, just as the Internet was beginning to gain widespread public attention, scholars, journalists, and businessmen alike took up Rheingold’s vision and transformed it into a model for thinking about new forms of computer-mediated sociability.53 Following his lead, scholars debated the authenticity of interpersonal connections online and explored the impact of disembodiment on the expression of the self. Although many critiqued the notion of virtual

community, most did so within terms set by the concept itself. Much as the dancers at the Trips Festival had imagined that LSD would allow them to escape their bodies and enjoy a new form of communion, scholars and reporters began to describe computer-mediated communication as a form of interaction in which bodies had ceased to matter. For many, the economic aspects of Rheingold’s description simply fell away. So did memories of earlier communication technologies, such as the telephone or even letters: what was distinct about this new form of communication, they suggested, was the way in which it facilitated disembodied intimacy.

On the WELL, the rhetoric of virtual community had made it possible to turn economically valuable information into gifts in part by obscuring the economic nature of certain transactions and the power relations established thereby. As the term virtual community made its way into public circulation, its ideological valence made it particularly appealing to the corporate world. If a company could sponsor an online “community,” and if it could convince its customers that they were engaging in social rather than economic activity (or if they could convince them that the social and the economic were always blurred in any “real” community), then they could increase customer allegiance and their own profits.54 Throughout the mid-1990s, many corporations, including the Microsoft Network and America Online, looked to the WELL to see how to pull this off. In keeping with Rheingold’s emphasis on the virtuality of his community, the executives of these companies tended to believe that it was digital technology rather than strong off-line, interpersonal networks or a shared countercultural idea set that made the establishment of community online possible.55 If Coate and Rheingold thought that computer networks would return isolated, postindustrial workers to a state of pre-industrial communion, members of the corporate sector thought such networks might bring isolated, postindustrial consumers into a state of postmodern economic communion.

As several writers, including Howard Rheingold, have noted, online communities have struggled, in part because they lack the local roots and strongly intertwined networks of the early WELL. Rheingold himself ultimately stopped using the designation virtual community and instead began referring to “online social networks.”56 Nevertheless, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, just as computer networks were emerging into public view, the notion of virtual community helped translate the New Communalist ethos of the Whole Earth network into a ready-made language for understanding the social possibilities of those networks and of new, multivalent forms of networked labor as well. Having emerged as a contact language on the WELL, a language that helped coordinate activities there, it was exported,

by Rheingold and other network members, until it had become a language that could coordinate the activities of scholars, businessmen, and far-flung journalists.

Turning Cyberspace into an Electronic Frontier In 1990 the WELL’s technology and management style, along with the networks that had gathered around the system and other Whole Earth–related organizations, became resources for the redefinition of cyberspace itself. In that year computer pundit John Perry Barlow became what most acknowledge to be the first person to apply the word cyberspace to the then-emerging intersection of telecommunications and computer networks.57 Drawing largely on his experience of the WELL, he configured this new, computernetwork-based cyberspace as an “electronic frontier.” In the process, he transformed a formerly dystopian vision of networked computing into an imagined space in which individuals could recreate themselves and their communities in terms set by New Communalist ideals. Like the rural landscape of the 1960s, Barlow’s cyberspace would stand beyond government control. And like a Happening or an Acid Test, it would provide a setting and tools through which individuals could establish intimate, disembodied connections with one another. By summoning up the image of the electronic frontier, Barlow transformed the local norms of the WELL, including its Whole Earth–derived communitarian ethic, its allegiance to antihierarchical governance, and its cybernetic rhetoric, into a universal metaphor for networked computing. By the mid-1990s, Barlow’s version of cyberspace had become perhaps the single most common emblem not only for emerging forms of computer-networked communication, but for leveled forms of social organization and deregulated patterns of commerce as well.

When cyberpunk novelist William Gibson first coined the word in his 1984 novel Neuromancer, cyberspace conjured up not the rural American frontier, but the electronic undergirding of a dark, hyperindustrialized landscape. Cyberspace itself was a luminous electronic universe, but one inhabited by potentially vicious anthropomorphized computer systems and dominated by large corporations. Tough, computer-savvy freelancers like the novel’s hero Case could “jack in” to this space—that is, they could wire themselves up and enter the electronic universe, leaving their bodies behind. Their disembodiment had little to do with entering a state of mystical union. On the contrary, it could kill. As Case discovered on several occasions, if you stayed too long in cyberspace, your heart could stop beating. For Gibson, cyberspace was a fictional tool with which to explore not only

the emerging possibilities of digital technologies, but also the deeply dystopian tendencies of American life in the early 1980s. Case and his fellow inhabitants of “the Sprawl” struggled to survive in the shadows of a world where large corporations had ruined the natural environment, where government seemed to be breaking down and local Mafias taking over, and where physical suffering was routine.58

For people working in high technology, however, Gibson’s vision of cyberspace held enormous appeal. As Allucquère Rosanne Stone has argued, for example, the idea of cyberspace allowed a geographically dispersed group of individuals working on three-dimensional imaging systems—systems that Jaron Lanier named “virtual reality”—to reimagine themselves as members of a coherent community collaborating on the construction of the future. This community had begun its work in the 1960s, developing flight-simulation gear for the air force. Its members had also developed computer-assisted design (CAD) technology, particularly at Nicholas Negroponte’s Architecture Machine Group—forerunner of the Media Lab—at MIT. In the early 1980s, many of these people migrated to Silicon Valley. In 1982, for instance, Scott Fisher, of the Architecture Machine Group, joined Atari. When the Atari lab closed, he moved to the NASA-Ames View Lab. There engineers had developed a virtual reality helmet and a sensor incorporated into a glove that could give the computer information about a subject’s hand movements. In 1985 NASA contracted to have this glove developed by Jaron Lanier’s Sausalito-based firm VPL Research; they manufactured the first glove in March 1986.59 Another East Coast engineer, Eric Gullichsen, arrived at about the same time. He ultimately joined Autodesk, a San Francisco Bay area maker of CAD systems. In 1988 Autodesk developed a “cyberspace” initiative (quickly dubbed “Cyberia”) in which they tried to build “‘a doorway into cyberspace’ for anyone with $15,000 and a 386 computer.”60 In 1989 Gullichsen went so far as to register the word cyberspace as a trademark. In return, William Gibson trademarked the word Gullichsen.

Throughout the 1980s, cyberspace was used primarily to describe virtual reality of the kind these firms were working to develop. But even as technologists worked to build a sort of placeless space, that space quickly became linked to local, Bay area stories of LSD and countercultural transformation. Autodesk, for instance, hired famed acid guru Timothy Leary to appear in its promotional video for its cyberspace initiative. Various journalists and science fiction writers also collaborated to link virtual reality to LSD. Ultimately, this group included Kevin Kelly and Stewart Brand, but its earliest and most active members were the writers and editors of the magazine Mondo 2000, including John Perry Barlow.61 In the fall of 1988, Alison

Kennedy (aka Queen Mu) and Ken Goffman (aka R. U. Sirius), publisher and editor-in-chief, respectively, used their first-ever issue to announce that digital technologies had inherited the transformational mantel of the counterculture:

All the old war horses are dead. Eco-fundamentalism is out, conspiracy

theory is demode, drugs are obsolete. There’s a new whiff of apocalypticism

across the land. A general sense that we are living at a very special juncture in

the evolution of the species.

Yet the pagan innocence and idealism that was the sixties remains and

continues to exert its fascination on today’s kids. Look at old footage of

Woodstock and you wonder: where have all those wide-eyed, ecstatic,

orgasm-slurping kids gone? They’re all across the land, dormant like deeply

buried perennials. But their mutated nucleotides have given us a whole new

generation of sharpies, mutants and superbrights and in them we must put

our faith—and power.

The cybernet is the place . . . The old information elites are crumbling.

The kids are at the controls.62

At one level, the notion that digital culture was growing directly out of the counterculture and the LSD scene reflected the editorial ancestry of Mondo 2000. Before coming to Mondo 2000, Goffman had edited a Bay area drug ’zine, High Frontiers, which he had subtitled “Psychedelics, Science, Human Potential, Irreverence & Modern Art.” High Frontiers featured lengthy interviews with LSD adventurers like Albert Hofmann, Timothy Leary, and Terence McKenna. In 1988 Goffman retitled the now-biennial magazine Reality Hackers, to mark its new emphasis on technology. It soon began running articles on computer viruses, psychoactive designer foods, and high-tech paganism.63 Later that year, Reality Hackers took up the cause of cyberpunk fiction and became Mondo 2000. Its first issue featured contributions by cyberpunk heroes William Gibson, Bruce Sterling, and John Shirley, as well as pieces on hackers and crackers and Internet viruses. As Timothy Leary put it, Mondo 2000 soon became “a beautiful merger of the psychedelic, the cybernetic, the cultural, the literary and the artistic.”64

At another level, though, the link between digital technology and hallucinogens reflected a shared dream of disembodiment. For those who had attended the Trips Festival some twenty years earlier, LSD seemed to offer a risky passage to an out-of-body experience, an opportunity to feel a psychic union with others in the crowd. For cyberpunk authors, digital prostheses offered their users the opportunity to escape their bodies and enter cyberspace. Even if that cyberspace was a dangerous, threatening zone—as it was

in Neuromancer—it could be beautiful, strange, and enticing. In the pages of Mondo 2000, readers learned that this new space was being built right here, right now, and they learned it from at least one writer with solid counterculture credentials: John Perry Barlow. In the summer of 1990 he visited the offices of Jaron Lanier’s VPL Research and donned a pair of VPL Eyephones and a VPL Dataglove. He published the following description of his experience in Mondo: “Suddenly I don’t have a body anymore. All that remains of the aging shambles which usually constitutes my corporeal self is a glowing, golden hand floating before me like Macbeth’s dagger. I point my finger and drift down its length to the bookshelf on the office wall. . . . In this pulsating new landscape, I’ve been reduced to a point of view. The whole subject of ‘me’ yawns into a chasm of interesting questions. It’s like Disneyland for epistemologists.” Barlow could as easily be describing an acid trip. For all the digital technology involved, in Barlow’s account the experience clearly belongs as much to the 1960s as the 1990s. And in case the reader has missed the point, Barlow quotes Lanier: “I think this is the biggest thing since we landed on the moon.”65

Barlow himself was a fairly recent convert to the power of digital technologies but an old hand with mysticism and LSD. He had been raised a Mormon and a Republican, the son of Wyoming ranchers. He had not been allowed to watch television until he reached the sixth grade, and when he did, he recalls, he mostly watched televangelists. At the age of fourteen, he was sent to a Catholic school, and, ironically, his religious feelings began to ebb. They changed again when he went to college at Wesleyan in Connecticut in the late 1960s and began to visit Timothy Leary’s group in nearby Millbrook, New York. With his first acid trip, his religious inklings returned. “The sense that there was something holy in the universe was with me again,” he later recalled. Yet that holy presence could not be contained within a particular dogma. Rather, Barlow began to move toward the mystical inclinations of a Catholic priest, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, whose work he read in college, and Gregory Bateson, whose Steps to an Ecology of Mind he had read in the early 1970s. In their work, and later in the work of biologists and chaos theorists, Barlow began to see what he called “an underlying grammar to nature.”66 The material world had become, for him, a shape-shifting collection of forms, each penetrated by a certain energy. Although the forms themselves would come and go, the energy remained, permanently circulating, uttering the world. In this sense, for Barlow as for Bateson, “mind was a space”—that is, mind and material world were both systems constituted and maintained by the circulation of energy and thus were mirrors of each other. And in Barlow’s experience, if not in Bateson’s, LSD had served as a gateway to that understanding.

In the early 1970s, Barlow put his mystical imagination to work for the house band of the San Francisco acid scene, the Grateful Dead. He had met Dead guitarist Bob Weir in boarding school. Starting in 1970, Barlow penned a variety of Dead songs, including “Hell in a Bucket,” “Picasso Moon,” “Mexicali Blues,” and “I Need a Miracle.”67 In the process, he entered a world in which technology—in this case, electric guitars, amplifiers, oversized speakers, and colored lights—were routinely used to create a state of ecstatic union. Whereas other bands might have played to an audience, the Grateful Dead saw themselves as playing for a community. Especially with the long, improvisational guitar riffs by their lead guitar player, Jerry Garcia, affectionately known as “Captain Trips,” the band would take their audience of Dead Heads on the aural equivalent of an acid trip. To attend a Dead concert was to enter another world, one in which drugs and technology were simply means to a harmonious, communitarian end.

At the same time, Barlow was working on his family’s cattle ranch in Pinedale, Wyoming. By the early 1980s, he had taken over the ranch and had begun writing a series of never-produced television scripts. He got a computer to help with formatting (computers were “a really smart form of white out,” he thought), and gradually became more and more interested in the machine itself. “Here was another environment that I could put my mind in that was clean,” he later remembered. “I wanted to kind of hide in there and I did.”68 What he wanted to hide from was the fact that the ranch was slowly failing:

I enjoyed being in the physical world [i.e., working on the ranch] and I would

be doing that still if I had been able to, but at a certain point I had to bow to the

same historical inevitabilities which have reduced what was, at the turn of the

century, fifty percent of the American work force in agriculture to less than one

percent today. I became part of that statistic. I sold the ranch. I didn’t know

what I would do for sure after that. But it did occur to me that there was a lot

more money in bullshit than there had ever been in bulls and I would get into

information. And here I am.69

Barlow’s shift from agricultural work to information work was abrupt, painful, and involuntary. “I did try my personal best to resist conscription as a Knowledge Worker,” he writes, “but I was as culturally doomed as the Tasaday of New Guinea. . . . Yanked from the 19th Century, I found myself . . . tossed unceremoniously onto the doorstep of the 21st.”70

For Barlow, this meant reaching out to his old friends in San Francisco. In 1986, while still in Pinedale, Barlow heard that David Gans, a Bay area disc jockey and connoisseur of the Grateful Dead, and hundreds of other Dead

Heads, were conversing on the WELL. In December 1986, Barlow joined. Over the next few years he became one of the system’s stars. As Bruce Sterling remembered, Barlow was “a computer networker of truly stellar brilliance. He had a poet’s gift of concise, colorful phrasing. He also had a journalist’s shrewdness, an off-the-wall, self-deprecating wit, and a phenomenal wealth of simple personal charm.”71 Like Howard Rheingold, Barlow contributed to the system in multiple ways, often simultaneously. He engaged in furious and funny debates about the nature of intellectual property, told personal stories, and periodically appeared for face-to-face meetings in San Francisco. For Barlow, as for Rheingold, the WELL was a simultaneously professional and interpersonal community; and as a working journalist, Barlow, like Rheingold, was able to take full and complex advantage of the system. Within four years of joining, he was writing regularly not only for Mondo 2000, but also for the Communications of the ACM, a newsletter for computer professionals. Shortly his work would begin appearing in Wired. Moreover, thanks to his presence on the WELL, Barlow became a source for a number of journalists. As reporter, commentator, and source, he began to weld his own experience of Pinedale, Wyoming, his acid-driven mysticism, and his experience of the WELL first to virtual reality and then to computernetworked communication.

As Barlow’s 1990 article on VPL for Mondo suggests, he had been thinking of cyberspace for some time as referring to virtual reality. At the same time, however, thanks to his participation on the WELL, he was beginning to think that it might refer to computer networks too. The shift in Barlow’s views began in December 1989, when Paul Tough and Jack Hitt, editors at Harper’s Magazine, hosted a forum on hacking on the WELL. Forums were a long-standing genre at Harper’s. Usually, the magazine would gather a half dozen experts on a particular issue, invite them to sit down with one another, and tape the ensuing conversation. Editors would later sort through the conversation, identify its main themes, and print key portions in the magazine. In 1989 the editors had become interested in hacking largely thanks to the case of Robert Morris Jr., a computer science graduate student at Cornell. In November 1988, he had released a “worm” onto the Internet. Self-propagating and self-replicating, the worm clogged thousands of computers around the world and gave many people their first glimpse of the power of computer viruses. It also reinforced long-standing public fears of rogue computer programmers and the damage they could do.72

Paul Tough, who suggested the forum, recommended that instead of the usual face-to-face meeting, it should be an invitation-only conference on the WELL. Tough had been a member of the WELL for six months, and in recruiting the thirty or so participants in the forum, Tough leaned heavily

on internal WELL networks.73 He selected some contributors, such as Lee Felsenstein and John Draper, who were in fact accomplished hackers. Many of these participants had migrated to the WELL after attending the Hackers’ Conference at Fort Cronkhite in 1984. Tough also selected many participants who could not have been described as hackers but who had been longtime, high-visibility participants on the WELL. These included Stewart Brand, Howard Rheingold, Kevin Kelly, and John Perry Barlow. Tough later recalled that he chose these participants in part for the fact that they had participated in debates about hacking on the WELL and in part because they wrote vivid prose.74 Yet it also seems likely that a network dynamic was at work here. As at the first Hackers’ Conference, those who helped host the discussion of a topic (in this case, on the WELL) had become visible to mainstream journalists (in this case, Tough) and had ultimately become part of the story themselves. In this way, their local legitimacy as WELL members served to validate their authority on the broader subject of hacking. Finally, in addition to WELL regulars, Tough included Emmanuel Goldstein, the editor of 2600, a New York quarterly devoted to the how-to’s of hacking, and, on Goldstein’s recommendation, two young, practicing hackers who worked under the pseudonyms Acid Phreak and Phiber Optik.

When they joined the discussion on the WELL, Phreak and Optik immediately set off a culture clash. The conflict could be seen clearly in the edited version of the forum eventually printed in Harper’s. Like the online forum, and like its predecessor, the Hackers’ Conference of 1984, the conversation opened with a discussion of the hacker ethic. WELL regulars described the ethic in cybernetic and countercultural terms familiar to their online colleagues. Lee Felsenstein compared hackers to the “Angelheaded hipsters” of Allen Ginsberg’s poem “Howl.” John Perry Barlow described them as solitary inventors designing a system through which humans would acquire the simultaneous unity of other “collective organisms.” Acid Phreak would have none of it. “There is no one hacker ethic,” he wrote. “Everyone has his own. To say that we all think the same way is preposterous.”75 Among WELL regulars like Felsenstein and Barlow, hackers were cybernetic counterculturalists, creatures devoted to establishing a new, more open culture by any electronic means necessary. For Acid Phreak, hackers were break-in artists devoted to exploring and exploiting weaknesses in closed and especially corporate systems.

The conflict came to a head over John Perry Barlow’s credit records. For some time, Barlow’s contributions to the online conversation had been echoing the WELL’s longstanding internal ethos of virtual community by comparing open computer systems to villages with unlocked doors. In his view, Phreak and Optik were failing to respect a village covenant.

Emmanuel Goldstein, however, pointed out that institutional computer systems bore little relation to small towns. Rather, they served as centers for the compilation of surveillance data. Thus confronted, Barlow turned away from the village metaphor and toward cybernetics. Institutions, he wrote, were organisms whose “blood is digital”; hackers needed to be “in their bloodstreams like an infection of humanity.”76 In keeping with the Whole Earth view of networked computing and the local ideologies prevalent on the WELL, Barlow continued to depict interlinked machines as representatives of interchangeable systems—small towns, organisms, digital networks. Ultimately, Acid Phreak lost patience with Barlow and, in a classic bit of realpolitik, used Barlow’s Pinedale address information to download and publish Barlow’s personal credit history.

For Acid Phreak, the distinction between a real small town and an institution-based network of computers was crystal clear. Small towns could be collaborative, democratic, and, in that sense, public places. Institutions like the company that had maintained Barlow’s credit records, however, were surveillance machines, organizations devoted to wresting individuals’ control of their personal information away from them and centralizing it elsewhere for profit. In the Harper’s forum, Acid’s views became entangled in a larger culture clash, however. On the one hand, with their flashy pseudonyms and steady-state irreverence, Phreak and Optik came closer to the dark public image of hacking suggested by Robert Morris. With their talk of cybernetics and “open” systems and rural villages, on the other hand, Felsenstein, Barlow and the WELL regulars offered a plausible, if imperfect, alternative vision of the Net.

In Paul Tough’s view, it was this culture clash that allowed two notions to enter wide public debate. For one thing, he recalls, Phreak and Optik had made it clear that hacking could be a free-speech issue, as the editors of 2600 had long maintained. But in addition, particularly through Barlow’s writings, the forum exposed the wider public to the “communitarian vision of the online world” popular at the WELL.77 Even as Phreak and Optik confronted Barlow within the forum, the forum itself modeled the WELL’s own vision of computer-mediated communication. In the pages of Harper’s, Tough and Hitt created a paginated version of the WELL. Like the online world of PicoSpan, the forum offered a disembodied, text-based conversation, one in which members of multiple networks— early hackers, the 2600 crowd, Whole Earth staffers, WELL regulars— came together around a particular question. In the Harper’s textual forum, as in its online version, and as in the face-to-face forum of the 1984 Hackers’ Conference, the communitarian ethos of the Whole Earth network was not only deployed as a symbolic resource in discussions of the hacker ethic; it was embedded in the

organization of the discussion itself. In each case, contributors took part in a seemingly nonhierarchical, disembodied conversation among equals, and they did so within the same computer “space” supposedly being attacked by these very hackers. It is this form of conversation, and the image of hackers participating in it, that Harper’s made visible to its readers.

Not long after the conclusion of the online discussion, and before the story appeared in the magazine, Harper’s invited John Perry Barlow to dinner with Phreak and Optik in Manhattan. “They looked to be as dangerous as ducks,” he later wrote. By his own account, Barlow became their “scoutmaster” and, as a result, began receiving “‘conference calls’ in which six or eight of them would crack pay phones all over New York and simultaneously land on my line in Wyoming.” On January 24, 1990, Barlow wrote, “a platoon of Secret Service agents entered the apartment which Acid Phreak shares with his mother and twelve-year-old sister. The latter was the only person home when they burst through the door with guns drawn. They managed to hold her at bay for about half an hour until their quarry happened home.”78 Acid Phreak, along with Phiber Optik and a third New York City cracker, nicknamed Scorpion, had been accused of causing a massive crash in the AT&T computer system ten days earlier. The Secret Service confiscated their computers, answering machines, notebooks, and computer disks.

For Barlow and other WELL regulars, these visits were just the latest steps in what had begun to look like a concerted government crackdown on hackers everywhere. In June 1989, for instance, the FBI had begun investigating a group calling itself the NuPrometheus League. Named for the Greek god Prometheus, the bringer of fire, the League had gotten hold of a proprietary patch of software code that helped control the screen display in the Apple Macintosh and had mailed copies of it to a number of prominent people in the computer industry. At Apple’s behest, the FBI began to interview the recipients of the code. Not long afterward, the Secret Service launched Operation Sundevil. On May 8, 1990, 150 agents fanned out in a dozen cities, executed some twenty-seven search warrants, and made three arrests. As a press release put out by the U.S. attorney’s office in Phoenix, Arizona, put it, the agents were out to stop “illegal computer hacking activities.”79 Hoping to counteract electronic fraud (including the cracking of phone systems), agents seized forty-two computer systems, twenty-five of which were running computer bulletin board systems that might have allowed for the sharing of information on cracking and hacking.80

To Barlow and others on the WELL, the government’s various searchand-seizure missions looked like an assault not only on particular forms of electronic activity, but also on a hacker culture that had itself become

intimately intertwined with WELL culture. Acid Phreak, for instance, had become a fairly popular presence on the WELL. When he was raided, WELL regulars tended to feel that his “crimes,” even if they had occurred, had not caused any significant damage. John Perry Barlow had long been active in WELL discussions of hacking and free speech, and in 1990 he linked the two as central components of “cyberspace.” In May of that year, as part of the NuPrometheus investigation, an FBI agent named Richard Baxter visited Barlow in Pinedale. Barlow’s name had appeared on a list of attendees at a recent Hackers’ Conference (by that time there were annual conferences descended from the 1984 event). According to Barlow, Baxter believed the Hackers’ Conference was a collection of computer criminals, likely with links to the NuPrometheus League.81 Baxter also harbored numerous varied misconceptions about the computer industry and computers themselves. As Barlow later recalled,

Poor Agent Baxter didn’t know a ROM chip from a Vise-grip when he

arrived, so much of that time was spent trying to educate him on the nature of

the thing which had been stolen. Or whether “stolen” was the right term for

what had happened to it.

You know things have rather jumped the groove when potential suspects

must explain to law enforcers the nature of their alleged perpetrations.82

Soon after Baxter left, Barlow posted an account of his visit on the WELL, as an early draft of what would ultimately become the essay in which he first described cyberspace as an electronic frontier: “Crime and Puzzlement.” Barlow’s account stirred up a hornet’s nest on the WELL. Some members even accused Barlow of serving as an FBI informant by attempting to educate Agent Baxter. One WELL member who read Barlow’s story was Mitch Kapor, who had founded Lotus Development Corporation, an early and highly successful software company. He had also coauthored Lotus 1-2-3, an extremely popular spreadsheet program. Some years earlier he had sold the company for tens of millions of dollars and had become something of a traveling computer pundit, writing on the WELL and elsewhere about intellectual property, software design, and civil liberties. In addition to being a WELL user, Kapor was a lifelong fan of the Whole Earth publications and owned a complete collection of its catalogs.83 He was also one of the people who had received a copy of Apple’s code in the mail from NuPrometheus.

In early June, not long after reading Barlow’s work on the WELL, and in a gesture that has since become a bit of cyberculture legend, Kapor found himself flying in his private jet near Pinedale, Wyoming. He called Barlow

from the air and asked if he might stop by. They had met before both socially and professionally (Barlow had interviewed Kapor for a computer magazine) but were not well acquainted. That afternoon, they sat down in Barlow’s kitchen and talked about the various government crackdowns then under way. Together they decided to found an organization called the Computer Liberty Foundation. As Barlow explained in a later draft of “Crime and Puzzlement,” the foundation would raise and channel funds for lobbying and education on issues of digital free speech. It would also involve itself in then-ongoing cases with an eye toward showing that the Secret Service had exercised prior restraint on publications. The foundation would, in addition, work “to convey to both the public and the policy-makers metaphors which will illuminate the more general stake in liberating Cyberspace.”84

The first and most influential of the metaphors Barlow referred to was the “electronic frontier.”85 Being master networkers, Kapor and Barlow quickly gained press coverage of their new organization as well as offers of funding from Steve Wozniak, cofounder of Apple, and John Gilmore of Sun Microsystems. They started a conference on the WELL, and they recruited Stewart Brand, among others, to serve on their new organization’s board of directors. One evening in the early fall, Barlow convened a dinner in San Francisco attended by Brand, Jaron Lanier, Chuck Blanchard (who worked at VPL with Lanier), and Paul Saffo (head of the Institute for the Future, a Silicon Valley think tank). Barlow and Kapor wanted help renaming their organization. Everyone at the dinner agreed that networked computing was then in what Barlow called “a frontier condition.” “I came up with Electronic Frontier Foundation over the course of that dinner,” Barlow recalled, “and everybody seemed to like it.”86

The Electronic Frontier Foundation would have a substantial impact on public discussions of computing and regulation throughout the 1990s. Already, though, even as Barlow’s dinner looked forward to that work, the notion he articulated there, of cyberspace as an electronic frontier, capped a long process by which the countercultural and cybernetic ideas that had informed the Whole Earth publications for two decades had migrated into the digital arena. In the final text of “Crime and Puzzlement,” which he posted to the WELL on June 8, 1990, for example, Barlow depicted cyberspace as a frontier, but his model for that frontier was the WELL. The WELL, he wrote, was “the latest thing in frontier villages,” a “small town” whose “Main Street is a central minicomputer.” The minicomputer was linked to others in a network that “extends all across the immense region of electron states, microwaves, magnetic fields, light pulses and thought which sci-fi writer William Gibson named cyberspace.” This region, wrote Barlow, “has a lot in common with the nineteenth-century West. It is vast,

unmapped, culturally and legally ambiguous, verbally terse . . . hard to get around in, and up for grabs.”87

Like John Coate and other WELL users, Barlow transformed the difficulty of using PicoSpan software into evidence that the WELL resembled the rural frontiers favored by the back-to-the-land movement. But Barlow’s account of cyberspace also mingled the countercultural critique of technocracy with a celebration of the mobility and independence required of information workers in a rapidly networking economy:

I’m a member of that half of the human race which is inclined to divide the

human race into two kinds of people. My dividing line runs between the

people who crave certainty and the people who trust chance. . . .

Large organizations and their drones huddle on one end of my scale, busily

trying to impose predictable homogeneity on messy circumstance. On the

other end, free-lancers and ne’er-do-wells cavort about, getting by on luck if

they get by at all.88

The “free-lancers and n’er-do-wells,” he explained, had found a home in cyberspace. As once members of the back-to-the-land movement had farmed the rural margins of the material American landscape in the hope of escaping the ostensibly dronelike lives of corporation men, so, in Barlow’s account, freelancers now roamed an immaterial landscape, Long Hunters trusting chance.

What is more, the best of them, like the rebels of the 1960s, were engaged in dismantling the very organizations in which drones were concentrated. These were the cyberpunks, whom Barlow, shifting rhetorical gears, described as “viruses” attacking the body of “The Institution.” For Barlow, the government’s crackdown on hacking had reawakened an old memory. “I drifted back into a 60’s-style sense of the government, thinking it a thing of monolithic and evil efficiency,” he wrote in 1990.89 In “Crime and Puzzlement,” the countercultural rebellion of the 1960s and the cybernetic rhetoric of biosocial systems together offered a symbolic language in which to celebrate the activities of freelance technology workers. In the process, the notion of cyberspace emerged as an emblem of an idealized, forwardlooking social system—and yet, the terms of that system had been set by debates that took place twenty years earlier.

Ultimately, Barlow argued that cyberspace offered what LSD, Christian mysticism, cybernetics, and countercultural “energy” theory had all promised: transpersonal communion. In Barlow’s account, the technological limitations of the WELL gave rise to and became evidence for a mystical transformation of humanity. “In this silent world,” he wrote, “all conversation is

typed. To enter it, one forsakes both body and place and becomes a thing of words alone.” To Barlow, writing before the advent of the World Wide Web and its graphical browsers, this was more than a simple function of computer conferencing technology; it was a Sign: “As a result of [the opening of cyberspace], humanity is now undergoing the most profound transformation of its history. Coming into the Virtual World, we inhabit Information. Indeed, we become Information. Thought is embodied and the Flesh is made Word. It’s weird as hell.”90 Barlow suggested that computer networks had achieved what the communes and countercultural consumption of the 1960s could not. Framed as the disembodied, nonhierarchical, high-tech home of computer hackers and other independent types, cyberspace, and its prototypical system, the WELL, constituted fitting alternatives to corporate and government hives. In the cybernetic style familiar to readers of the Whole Earth Catalog and CoEvolution Quarterly, Barlow held out cyberspace as a simultaneously technological, biological, and social system. His cyberspace became part of a universal discourse, enfolding experiences in multiple domains, and his “electronic frontier” extended well beyond the electronic confines of linked computers.

Nevertheless, like the homegrown rhetoric of virtual community on the WELL, Barlow’s universal discourse of cyberspace simultaneously modeled and masked a new and very personal economic reality. By the time he wrote “Crime and Puzzlement,” Barlow’s ranch had failed. His own material American frontier landscape had faded from view. Like other members of the WELL, Barlow had become an independent information worker. In his notion of cyberspace as an electronic frontier, he had transformed his personal experience of economic transformation into a universal forecast. As he wrote in 1994, Barlow had come to believe that “we must seek our future in the virtual world because there is no economic room left in the physical one.”91 In the 1960s, Barlow and others of his generation saw themselves as having been failed by the large institutions around them and, in response, attempted to form alternative communities. The Whole Earth Catalog had been both an emblem of and a resource for those communities. Twenty years later, Barlow suggested, he and others were failed by the traditional economy, and they had to once again constitute an alternative community. For this community, the frontier of cyberspace, and especially the village of the WELL, would have to be home.
