---
book: "From Counterculture to Cyberculture"
author: "Fred Turner"
section_kind: "Ch6"
section: "Networking the New Economy"
source_pages: "186-217"
type: source
---

# Networking the New Economy

In the late 1980s and the early 1990s, the same economic and technological forces that had long shaped work lives in Silicon Valley swept across much of the industrialized world. Networked forms of production, contract employment, global outsourcing, and deregulated marketplaces all became common features of everyday economic life. So did the nearly universal use of computers and computer networks in business and, increasingly, in the home. Together, these developments suggested to many at the time, and particularly to politicians and pundits on the right, that a “new economy” had appeared, one in which digital technologies and networked forms of economic organization combined to liberate the individual entrepreneur. In a 1988 speech at Moscow State University, President Ronald Reagan became one of the first to make the case. “In the new economy,” he explained, “human invention increasingly makes physical resources obsolete. We’re breaking through the material conditions of existence to a world where man creates his own destiny.”1

Such a vision was very congenial to many members of the Whole Earth network, and as the economic and technological whirlwinds of the late 1980s gathered speed, Brand and, later, Kevin Kelly, drew heavily on the intellectual and social resources of the group. Each created new network forums in which formerly distinct communities could come together, exchange legitimacy, and become visible, to one another and to outsiders, as a single entity. In Brand’s case, these communities included representatives of MIT’s Media Lab and the Stanford Research Institute and officers of such corporate giants as Royal Dutch/Shell, Volvo, and AT&T, as well as former New Communalists. In the late 1980s Brand helped turn these individuals into

the principals and clients of a small but highly influential consulting firm, the Global Business Network. For his part, Kevin Kelly linked computer simulation experts affiliated with Los Alamos National Laboratory and its offshoot, the Santa Fe Institute, to prairie ecologists, Biospherians, and programmers at Xerox PARC. In a 521-page volume entitled Out of Control: The Rise of Neo-Biological Civilization, Kelly transformed these scientists and their projects into prototypical representatives of what he claimed was a new era in human evolution.

Many of these scientists, like many of the clients of the Global Business Network, represented organizations and worked with technologies that had grown directly out of the cold war– era military-industrial complex. Within the precincts of the Global Business Network and Out of Control, however, these organizations acquired a new political valence. They became models of a collaborative world, a world in which technologies were rendering information systems visible, material production processes irrelevant, and bureaucracy obsolete. Their executives and engineers also became visible stand-ins for an emerging corporate elect— entrepreneurial, technologically savvy, but socially and culturally conservative. Like the communards of New Mexico and northern California, the scientists, futurists, and entrepreneurs of the Global Business Network and Out of Control constituted a highly educated, mobile, and predominantly white elite. Like the contributors to the original Whole Earth Catalog, they mingled the rhetorical and social practices of systems theory with the New Communalist celebration of disembodied intimacy and geographically distributed communion. Yet, like the communards, they also largely turned away from those whose bodies, work styles, and incomes differed from their own. By the mid-1990s, the technocentric, networked social worlds of the Global Business Network and Out of Control had become widely looked-to examples of the flexibility and individual satisfaction promised by the New Economy. They would soon become emblems of the social possibilities of the Internet and the World Wide Web as well. As they did, they helped shape popular understandings of the New Economy in terms set not only by the New Communalist dream of social transformation, but also by the New Communalist practice of social segregation.

Back to the Future at MIT By 1985, despite his founding interest in the WELL, Stewart Brand had begun to get restless. He had edited CoEvolution Quarterly for a decade; the Whole Earth Software Catalog was failing rapidly. “By the time I’d done a half a dozen versions of the book, ending with a Whole Earth Software Catalog in

1985,” Brand later explained, “I had no idea whatever about futures and was operating strictly on reflex.”2 Since Kevin Kelly had taken over the editorship of the Whole Earth Review, and since the WELL seemed to be selfsustaining, Brand felt ready to leave Sausalito for a while. In 1984 he attended the first of Richard Saul Wurman’s Technology, Entertainment, Design (TED) conferences and heard Nicholas Negroponte describe his plans for MIT’s new Media Lab.

Brand was dazzled. Negroponte was very much a showman-intellectual in the style of Brand’s earlier mentor Buckminster Fuller. A few months later, Brand wrote to Negroponte, asking for a short-term job. Negroponte offered Brand a three-month appointment at MIT’s Media Lab. Starting in January 1986, Brand was to help out on a series of projects, including one being led by his old friend from Xerox PARC, Alan Kay, and to teach a class of his own design. That month, he moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts, and took up residence in Kay’s house. Over the next year he taught at the Lab, met with its various scientists, attended classes and briefings, and ultimately began to draft a book about the Lab. Brand saw the Lab as an example of the sort of research group he had once hoped the Whole Earth Catalog crew could become. Surrounded by computer scientists, musicians, and artists, all linked together by e-mail, Brand began to imagine the Lab as an emblem of a techno-tribal future. In that future, as in the New Communalist past, independent interdisciplinarians would take up tools, transform their individual mind-sets, and establish new collectivities built on a shared delight in innovation.

They would also carry forward the legacy of MIT’s own collaborative research culture. In 1987 Brand published his best-selling profile of the Lab, The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at MIT, in which he explained that the Media Lab was a direct descendant of the Rad Lab. In 1952, he wrote, Jerome Wiesner, an electrical engineer and a Rad Lab veteran, took charge of the Rad Lab’s postwar incarnation, the Research Laboratory of Electronics (RLE). At the RLE, as formerly in and around the Rad Lab, natural scientists, computer scientists, and electronics engineers worked together in a multidisciplinary full-court press to understand all forms of communication—mechanical, electronic, and biological. Wiesner never believed, as Wiener did, that the human brain and the computer could model one another. Even so, the RLE, like the Rad Lab, offered a rich soup of information theory and rhetoric, much of it growing out of the cybernetic intuition that digital systems and natural systems might model one another. Over the next two decades, the RLE went on to spawn the field of artificial intelligence, with its own MIT Lab (the AI Lab), and the Architecture Machine Group, headed by Nicholas Negroponte. After seven years of fund-raising by Negroponte and

Wiesner, the Architecture Machine Group evolved into the Media Lab, and in 1985 it took up residence in a $45 million I. M. Pei–designed building in the heart of the MIT campus.

In Inventing the Future, Brand depicted the Media Lab not only as a bridge between the cybernetic past and the digital future, but as the institutional home of a new form of technocentric performance art. The Media Lab was a functioning institution and a metaphor, he explained.3 As an institution, it sat at the hub of a wide corporate and academic network. With an annual budget of $6 million a year, the Lab had almost one hundred sponsors at the time of Brand’s visit, each of whom had paid a minimum of two hundred thousand dollars to join. The sponsors were not allowed to demand that any particular research be done on their behalf. Rather, they were buying permission to watch as the eleven different subdivisions of the Lab went about exploring the possibilities of human-machine interaction and multimedia convergence; a sponsor could later act on any insights that emerged. Around the time of Brand’s visit, the Lab employed a wide array of specialists, including scientists, musicians, visual artists, and software engineers. Together they developed projects ranging from electronic newspapers to wearable computers and large-scale holograms. Media Lab personnel were never required to produce artifacts that could be mass-produced or that would feed directly into sponsors’ lines of business per se. Instead, they were expected to produce “demos.” In these famously flashy presentations, graduate students and faculty alike would show how digital technology might alter a particular social practice. Corporate sponsors joined the Lab more for the chance to watch these demos than to get assistance with their ongoing research needs.

The Media Lab demos marked the latest steps in a complex dance between high-technology research culture and the American counterculture. To be sure, they represented a traditional feature of engineering culture, particularly its World War II incarnation. In the Rad Lab and later, across those disciplines linked by systems theory, scientists and engineers routinely demonstrated new technologies in order to make manifest not only their immediate applications, but also their broad ability to transform existing social systems. Norbert Wiener’s anti-aircraft predictor, Ross Ashby’s homeostat, and numerous other cybernetic machines each served as a demonstration of the ways that human life could be enhanced by human-machine integration. In the late 1960s, the New Communalist wing of the counterculture had, in its own way, thoroughly embraced the “demo-or-die” ethos of the engineering world. In venues like the Trips Festival, the hippies of Haight-Ashbury sought to demonstrate the ability of technologies such as LSD, stereos, and stroboscopic lights to amplify human consciousness.

The communes of the Southwest, too, served as demonstrations, illustrating the powers of new forms of housing and new forms of cohabitation to model a new society. These various local demonstrations were connected by a far-flung network of interpersonal relationships, a network in which Stewart Brand was a key figure.

Fifteen years later, Brand symbolically integrated the Media Lab into this network, depicting the Lab as a living demonstration of an alternative society based on a shared and technologically amplified experience of consciousness. The Lab, he wrote, served as a “prefiguration of the wider evolution” of media and organizational systems. The counterculture may have faded away and its networks dissolved, but a new mechanism for transpersonal communion was emerging. “A global computer is taking shape, and we’re all connected to it,” Brand explained. “How we’re connected to it is the Media Lab’s prime interest.”4 The Media Lab, like the Whole Earth Catalog before it, served as both an emblem of this developing world and a mechanism through which to enter it. As a working laboratory at MIT, the Media Lab was actively building real digital artifacts and networks. Like the products Brand had once reviewed in the Catalog, the Media Lab’s digital newspapers and Lego robots could be bought and used, so to speak, at least by corporate clients. And like the Catalog itself, the lab served to link representatives of relatively disconnected groups—in this case, corporate, academic, and technical—into a single functioning network.

Brand depicted in his book both those human networks and their relationship to information technologies as prototypes of a simultaneously cybernetic and New Communalist social ideal. Brand found the Media Lab to be an open, diverse, and nonhierarchical social system, much like the media it was inventing. “Mass media,” wrote Brand, mixing his metaphors, were “a form of cultural monocropping.” Citing Norbert Wiener, he depicted mass media as dangers to the health of society. The scientists of the Media Lab, in contrast, were “committed to making the individual the driver of the new information technologies rather than the driven.”5 With the individual in charge, a new “communication environment” was emerging— diverse, interconnected, complex, and presumably healthy. The Media Lab stood as a particularly magnificent prototype of this “environment.” Its internal diversity of scientists, technologists, anthropologists, and so on mirrored the diversity of an ideal ecosystem and an ideal society. So too did the diverse digital technologies it was developing. They both reflected and triggered the development of a nonhierarchical society, highly individuated and linked by invisible—in this case, digital—forces.

If Brand’s Media Lab seemed to model a digital version of a New Communalist political ideal, Nicholas Negroponte as Brand portrayed him

resembled that era’s heroes. Brand compared Negroponte to McLuhan, noting that both knew how to play to a crowd. “Indeed,” wrote Brand, “this is no rumpled, tweedy, musing scholar. Fortune magazine observed that he ‘looks more like a matinee idol than a walking paradigm of the state-of-theart technologist.’ Negroponte does look a bit like a young Robert Wagner. He’s meticulously groomed and dresses sharp.”6 In addition to his sartorial splendor, Negroponte possessed another quality for which McLuhan might have been known: “handwaving.” Negroponte and others in the Lab waved their hands as they moved “past provable material into speculation, anticipating and overwhelming objection with manual dexterity.”7 Like McLuhan, and perhaps even more like Buckminster Fuller, Negroponte could make an emerging way of life visible to Brand in his speech. Moreover, like Kesey, Negroponte seemed to live the life he preached for others. As LSD and a beat-up school bus had once freed Kesey to roam the American landscape with a tribe of friends, so digital technologies now allowed Negroponte to turn work into play. “Some of us enjoy a privileged existence where our work life and our leisure life are almost synonymous,” he told Brand. “More and more people I think can move into that position with the coming of truly intimate technology.”8

In Brand’s account, then, the Media Lab became a link in two chains simultaneously: one the chain of cybernetics, strung from the Rad Lab of World War II to the Media Lab of the present, and the other the chain of countercultural revolution, strung from the communes of the 1960s to the computer labs of the 1980s. Brand’s book was infused with the universal rhetorical logic common to both intellectual trajectories. That is, he depicted the Media Lab and its digital technologies, as well as Negroponte and the corporate and research cultures within which he worked, as prototypes of an emerging socio-technical world. Each element modeled every other: the Media Lab made digital-social hybrids; its culture was itself a hybrid of digital and cultural workers; the world that its research would produce would be infused with such hybrids. In this sense, the Lab not only made and sold “demos” but was a demo in its own right. So was the life of its leader. If the Lab demonstrated the way a “wired” world might look, then Negroponte was the image of the social possibilities such a world might offer. Mobile, wealthy, handsome, completely networked in both the technological and the political sense, Negroponte was a new kind of man. As an echo of Marshall McLuhan, though, he was also the reincarnation of an earlier generation of hero. Like the Media Lab he headed, Negroponte was the living bridge between the legacy of cybernetics and the legacy of countercultural experimentation.

Almost immediately after it was published in 1987, Inventing the Future became a best seller in the United States and abroad. The Media Lab itself

became the subject of numerous magazine and newspaper stories, most notably a lengthy encomium in Time magazine.9 Over the coming years, both the Media Lab and Nicholas Negroponte would become leading emblems of the techno-social future. They would also become touchstones for Brand’s next venture, the Global Business Network.

Building the Global Business Network Shortly before Brand took up residency at the Media Lab, he and his new wife, Patty Phelan, traveled to Africa (he had exchanged a stay on their tugboat in Sausalito for a stay on a twenty-thousand-acre game ranch). On his way home in the fall of 1986, he stopped in London to visit an old friend, Peter Schwartz. Brand and Schwartz had known each other since the early 1970s, when Schwartz worked as a futurist at the Stanford Research Institute (SRI) and served on the board of the Portola Foundation. Since early 1982, Schwartz had been employed in the Planning Group at Royal Dutch/Shell, and he had recently begun writing for the Whole Earth Review under the pseudonym Szanto. The Planning Group had an unusual reputation in business circles. Through the late 1960s, Shell had planned its future business activities using a highly quantitative procedure known as the Unified Planning Machinery. Around 1970, though, members of the Planning Group embraced a version of the scenario methodology developed by futurist Herman Kahn.10 Using it, the group had predicted the oil crisis of 1973, allowing Shell to profit when other oil companies had not. In 1981 they repeated the feat, and Shell was able to sell off its oil reserves before an international collapse in oil prices occurred. In 1986 the group’s head, Arie de Geus, had begun to reexamine the company’s planning process. Knowing of Brand’s long-standing interest in organizational change, Schwartz introduced the two.

As a result of that meeting, de Geus and Schwartz hired Brand to organize a series of networking events known as the Learning Conferences; those events in turn gave rise to a network organization that, like the Media Lab, would have a substantial impact on public perceptions of digital technology and the New Economy. Like the Media Lab, the Learning Conferences and the Global Business Network that grew out of them would bridge cybernetic theory and the countercultural critique of hierarchy. On the one hand, they would draw on the collaborative work styles and systems rhetoric characteristic of cold war research institutes. On the other hand, they would recreate the New Communalist turn away from politics and toward business and everyday life as sites of social change. Like the happenings of the New York art world or the communes that followed them, the Learning

Conferences offered their attendees an experience of intense interpersonal connection and at the same time presented that experience as a metaphor for an ideal, elite, and alternative way of living. At the height of the cold war, countercultural artists and communards had hoped to create alternatives to bureaucratic technocracy. Now, in the late 1980s, as the cold war wound to a close, Brand, de Geus, and Schwartz melded countercultural and cybernetic rhetoric, practice, and social theory to help corporate executives model and manage their work lives in a post-Fordist economy.

In keeping with Brand and de Geus’s first discussions, the six semiannual Learning Conferences were designed to explore the dynamics of group learning. Brand staged the events in environments that he considered to be “learning systems” in their own right. One meeting took place at Biosphere 2 in the Arizona desert; another involved a visit to Danny Hillis’s Thinking Machines Corporation in Cambridge, Massachusetts; a third brought participants to the Esalen Institute in Big Sur. Like the Media Lab, these sites were meant to be both material and metaphorical. That is, they would allow participants to simultaneously study and engage with a “system” as it learned. They would also allow new interpersonal networks to form. The conferences were jointly sponsored by Shell, AT&T, and Volvo. For each conference, Brand reached out to his extended network of contacts and sought to bring them together with representatives of the sponsoring corporations. Regular participants included Mary Catherine Bateson (anthropologist daughter of Gregory Bateson and Margaret Mead), Peter Warshall (ecologist and steady contributor to the Whole Earth publications), and Chilean neurobiologist Francisco Varela—all longtime friends of Brand—as well as MIT’s Marvin Minsky (head of the AI Lab) and Seymour Papert (a researcher at the Media Lab) and senior executives from the sponsoring corporations. Between face-to-face meetings, participants were invited to participate in a private conference on the EIES network and, later, on the WELL.

Brand modeled the conferences on the Macy meetings that had done so much to promote cybernetics. Like the organizers of those sessions, he hoped to bring together representatives of various communities with an eye to generating not formal products so much as intellectual insights and new rhetorics and new social networks to support them. “The meetings did not ‘work’ in the sense of creating any tangible product,” recalled Schwartz. “Rather, they led to understandings and collaborations, for both the corporate clients and the participants.” In the context of the conferences themselves, these collaborations first emerged alongside a systems-oriented contact language. Brought together from a variety of disciplines and communities, the participants needed to find a common tongue. “One language

that we found in common— even amongst our different disciplines—was the idea of distributed learning,” Brand later remembered. The notion of distributed learning, in which individuals learn together as elements in a system, was simultaneously congenial to Shell executives (“because that’s pretty much how they do their administration”), to cyberneticians such as Francisco Varela (because it seemed to describe his notion of “awakening systems”), to computer engineers like Danny Hillis (because it was a conceptual element of massively parallel computing), and to Brand’s own “‘access to tools’ approach to life.”11 Gradually, Brand later remembered, this rhetoric of distributed learning appeared to offer the answer to the questions that the founders of the conferences had first hoped to address: “We came to feel that the question of how you accelerate learning or adaptivity has already become answered—by distributed adaptivity or learning. That wasn’t even discussed as such—it just emerged as a common language among the people at the Learning Conferences.”12

The common language also closed a universal rhetorical loop. To the participants in the Learning Conferences, it served as both an answer to the question of how groups learn best and a tool with which to keep their particular, emerging network working. “In a sequence of conferences with mostly the same people, they become friends,” Brand explained. “Gradually their professional lives intersect, and they visit each others’ homes. . . . It’s a family affair. Then it affects the work they choose to do.”13 In the Learning Conference model, the members of a nascent, interdisciplinary network were in fact geographically distributed collaborators. They were getting to know not only a shared body of ideas, but one another as well. Over time, their experience supplied a language of distributed learning that modeled that experience and offered answers to the analytical questions they had brought to the group. In effect, the social network itself became the answer to its members’ questions as to the nature and effects of group learning. If the future of group learning was “distributed adaptivity,” then the members of the Learning Conferences, huddled together in the Arizona desert or out on a cold Norse sea, were its vanguard. They were a human “system,” the biological mirror of the digital networks through which they communicated and of the geographically distributed network of “learning systems” they visited twice a year. And, of course, they were also a model of the sort of “learning system” that the corporations that funded the conferences hoped to become.

In 1987 the networks and cybernetic thought style of the Learning Conferences became the basis of the Global Business Network (GBN). Peter Schwartz, together with Jay Ogilvy, whom he had hired at SRI and who was now director of research for the SRI Values and Lifestyles Program

(a marketing research team), wanted to design a consulting firm that could take advantage of the networks and networking mind-set that had begun to emerge around the Learning Conferences. They recruited as cofounders Brand, Shell veteran Napier Collyns, and Lawrence Wilkinson, a Bay area financier and media producer who was serving at the time as president of Colossal Pictures, a film and television production company. As Schwartz put it, the founders hoped that GBN would do three things for their clients: “plug them into a network of remarkable people, . . . include them in a highly focused and filtered information flow, and . . . reorganize their perceptions about alternative futures through the scenario method.”14

Like the Learning Conferences, the Global Business Network was designed to consist of overlapping networks of people, events, and information media. First, the company gathered up a network of individuals from a variety of fields: computing, ecology, anthropology, biology, and journalism, among others. It then created various forums in which corporate clients could interact with this network. Some were face-to-face, others took place online, and still others consisted of newsletters and lists of books suggested by members. Second, the company offered narrowly targeted consulting services, mainly grouped around scenario planning. In this way, GBN drew on the organizational structure and forecasting tools of cold war– era research culture and blended them with the countercultural turn toward business and social networks as sites of social change. GBN itself became both a model and a source of symbolic and rhetorical resources for corporate executives and government officials looking to understand post-Fordist forms of economic activity. In its meetings, its publications, and its presentations, GBN offered those individuals a vision of the New Economy as a networked entity, open to management by elite social groups and charismatic leaders and linked by interpersonal and informational networks, an entity whose laws could be made visible through a mix of systems theory, collaborative social practice, and mystical insight.

GBN’s particular blending of countercultural and techno-cultural organizational styles depended on its roots in two organizations, the Stanford Research Institute and Royal Dutch/Shell. In the 1950s and 1960s, SRI and Shell represented the apogee of the military and the industrial worlds. SRI had been founded in 1947 to offer business consulting for the oil industry, but, along with the RAND Corporation, it very quickly became one of the two leading American think tanks for the U.S. military. Royal Dutch/Shell was a multinational behemoth devoted to extracting and refining oil. Yet, elements of both organizations had embraced countercultural practices. GBN cofounders Jay Ogilvy and Peter Schwartz, for instance, both worked at SRI just as the military-industrial consulting firm found itself coming to grips

with the counterculture around it. As Art Kleiner has pointed out, SRI was the first university-based research institute to offer consulting services for business, the military, and scientific organizations, and to mingle operations research, economics, and political forecasting in the process. In the late 1960s and 1970s, with offices just down the road from Stanford in Menlo Park, SRI was permeated with a sense of what Kleiner calls “the sheer, pragmatic, exalting usefulness of system-centered, holistic faith.” Much of that faith had first grown up in the heart of the cold war research establishment, around Jay Forrester’s research in systems dynamics at MIT. But some of it had also come out of the Bay area’s psychedelic scene. In 1967 SRI hired Willis Harman, cofounder of the Institute for Advanced Study, where Stewart Brand had first taken LSD. Harman brought with him a conviction that the psychological and social barriers of the white-collar, corporate world needed to be broken down so that executives and engineers might have insight not only into their own minds, but into the true nature of the world around them. LSD, which was now illegal, had been one tool for that purpose; perhaps, he thought, futures research could be another.15

By 1972 Harman was heading the Futures Group at SRI; in 1973 he hired Peter Schwartz. Only a few years out of college, Schwartz quickly absorbed both planning methodology and countercultural politics. At SRI he had the chance to work on contracts for both corporate and government clients. He soon came to believe that of the two, the corporate sector was more flexible and more open to change and, in particular, that businesses, unlike governments, could be decentralized. This impression was reinforced by his participation in the San Francisco Bay area’s countercultural business scene. Schwartz happened to live near Paul Hawken, founder of the organic grocery chain Erewhon Trading Company and later cofounder of the gardening tools company Smith & Hawken. Together they became involved in the Whole Earth Truck Store, and in the mid-1970s they joined the board of the Portola Institute, home of the Whole Earth Catalog. Schwartz went on to be an early investor in Smith & Hawken. Standing outside governmental and corporate organizations, these enterprises worked very much in synch with the precepts of the countercultural critique of bureaucracy. Each sought to support individual lifestyles that their staffers believed would, in aggregate, lead to collective change; and all stood against the hierarchical organization and psychological fragmentation they thought characteristic of large-scale American industry.16

From their work at SRI and their connections with Hawken and the Whole Earth community, Ogilvy and Schwartz brought to the Global Business Network a deep faith in business as a site of social change and a habit of working in an informal, networked way. They also came with extensive

experience in scenario planning. Like Norbert Wiener’s cybernetics, the scenario method had its roots in World War II, when American military planners tried to model the possible behaviors of their enemies.17 Paul Edwards has pointed out that in its earliest efforts, World War II operations research gathered up and quantified many different kinds of data about observed enemy actions so as to predict enemy behavior in the future. Systems analysts then aimed the quantitative methods of operations research toward developing cost-benefit analyses of potential missions. After World War II, however, analysts confronted an array of nuclear weapons for which, of course, no combat data existed. As Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi has argued, “Atomic weapons brought about a colossal shift in authority. They swallowed up the personal wisdom of senior officers rooted in combat experience in favor of intuitions arising from repeated trials of laboratory-staged simulations of future war.”18 Under conditions of nuclear uncertainty, analysts had to imagine the data to which they might apply the mathematical formulas, game theories, and computer technologies they had developed for earlier forms of combat. In short, they had to simulate the future.

At the RAND Corporation and later, at his own Hudson Institute, Herman Kahn, perhaps the most well-known analyst of this period, began to present his simulations in the form of scenarios—narrative scripts of possible futures. These included his infamous scenarios for nuclear Armageddon, in which he tried to convince policymakers that nuclear warfare was a real possibility and one for which they should prepare, and his equally wellknown visions for America in the year 2000.19 On the one hand, Kahn’s work on nuclear war seemed to many to be the epitome of American technocratic hubris. Even today, many remember Kahn primarily as the model for Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Strangelove. Rather than acknowledge the utter futility of a nuclear war, Kahn seemed to revel in planning for its aftermath. He once told a reporter, “We [scenario writers] take God’s view. The President’s view. Big. Aerial. Global. Galactic. Ethereal. Spatial. Overall. Megalomania is the standard occupational hazard.” At the same time, however, particularly as the 1960s progressed, Kahn embraced the American counterculture. “I like the hippies,” he explained to a reporter in 1968. “I’ve been to Esalen. I’ve had LSD a couple of times. In some ways I’d like to join them.” The Whole Earth community reciprocated. In 1976, during a brief stint as an adviser to California governor Jerry Brown, Stewart Brand brought Herman Kahn to Brown’s office to talk with the governor and energy conservationist Amory Lovins. He printed their conversation, as well other writings by Kahn, in CoEvolution Quarterly.20

In 1971 two futurists, Ted Newland and Pierre Wack, began using Kahn’s analytical techniques at Shell’s Group Planning Office in London. When

these still largely quantitative modeling methods began to suggest that oil prices might rise very rapidly in the early 1970s, Shell’s managers ignored them. In response, Wack led Newland and the planning team to shift rhetorical gears.21 In his college days, during World War II, Wack had attended weekly salons at the Paris home of the mystic philosopher Georges Ivanovitch Gurdjieff. During his time there, Wack began to develop a deep preoccupation with “seeing”—that is, with perceiving the hidden order of events and the inner natures of individuals. At about this time as well, Gurdjieff was writing a book that would later be published as Meetings with Remarkable Men. In Gurdjieff ’s account, a “remarkable man” was someone who “stands out from those around him by the resourcefulness of his mind” and who conducts himself “justly and tolerantly towards the weakness of others.”22 Throughout his life, Wack would seek out “remarkable men”—apprenticing himself, for instance, to an Indian guru and a Japanese Zen gardener—with an eye to increasing his own insight into human nature and the structures of world affairs.

At Shell, Wack used Gurdjieff ’s mystical orientation to reorient the corporate planning process. In the early 1970s, for example, rather than present charts and figures, he drew on Gurdjieff ’s narrative style and began telling stories about the future. His stories were sufficiently compelling that Shell’s managers did in fact prepare for the price rise that took place in 1973. This experience led Wack to believe that in order to make the corporate future visible, he had to change executives’ mental maps of the world. In Wack’s view, the minds of managers were a microcosm of the world outside. To change that world, he would first have to change the microcosm.23 Wack turned to scenarios as tools for changing executive mind-sets and, with them, the direction of the corporation. By the mid-1970s, his scenarios had welded the quantitative modeling of wartime operations research and the fantastic futurism of cold war atomic forecasting to the experiential, insightoriented practices of the mystics and gurus favored by the hippies. Scenarios became a form of corporate performance art; in Wack’s form of scenario planning, two traditions, corporate and countercultural, merged.

In the 1970s Peter Schwartz absorbed that form of planning, and in 1982 he took the retiring Wack’s place at Shell. At the Global Business Network, scenario planning retained its countercultural and systems-theoretical connotations. “Essentially,” Schwartz later recalled, “we wanted to create a new type of company which would do for many clients what Pierre Wack had done for Shell.”24 The Global Business Network, like the Learning Conferences—and like SRI, RAND, and the Planning Group at Shell— constantly entwined the formation of interpersonal networks and the modeling of network systems. When it was formally founded in 1987, GBN charged clients

twenty-five thousand dollars per year.25 In return for their annual dues, clients were invited to gatherings called WorldView Meetings two to four times a year; enjoyed subscriptions to a series of in-house reports; received a new book every month, chosen by Stewart Brand; and were granted a membership to the WELL and access to a private GBN conference on it. For an extra fee, they could hire GBN to work with their home organizations to create site-specific scenarios. The GBN founders had pegged their rate to the going salary for an executive research assistant, promising to deliver more in the way of information and insight collectively than any individual researcher could alone.26 Much like the Whole Earth Catalog, GBN aimed to grant its members “access to tools” for changing their social worlds, and like the Catalog, GBN included among those tools not only information and technique, but new social networks as well.

The founders quickly extended the GBN networks to include the former leaders of the cold war military-industrial complex. Over the next ten years, GBN listed as clients not only multinational corporations such as Xerox, IBM, BellSouth, AT&T, Arco, and Texaco, but also the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Defense Department. To some members of the Whole Earth community, GBN’s embrace of such clients seemed to mark a strategic forgetting of earlier commitments to local economics and small-scale technologies. Paul Hawken, for example, though still a member of GBN, pointed out that the Whole Earth Catalog was full of examples of the “small scale working and large scale not working.” When Brand and GBN decided to take on large corporate and government clients, he argued, “the scale question was rationalized: ‘Well, yes, but they’re awfully nice people and they mean well.’” Moreover, by the mid-1980s there was a sense in Whole Earth circles that “they [big corporations] are here and we’ve got to talk.” In Hawken’s view, as in the views of many in the 1970s who objected to Stewart Brand’s support of space stations, it was not so much the turn toward working with business or even the government that rankled; rather, it was the turn to large organizations. Such organizations were hard to hold accountable, Hawken explained, and their executives had a low tolerance for truths that challenged the mission or the profits of the company. However, he said the founders of the Global Business Network had made an important discovery: “Under the guise of very conservative planning, you could talk about radical ideas.”27

Peter Schwartz later recalled that the founders had hoped clients would explore those ideas within a network that felt “convivial, like a club that people could join.” To that end, they kept administrative staff at a minimum. In 1994, for instance, GBN had some 30 employees while serving 55 corporate and governmental clients and earning $4.5 million in annual

revenues.28 But in addition to the five founders and the staff, GBN’s promotional materials reminded prospective clients, the firm included a loose group of about 90 affiliates, known as “network members.” These members had been brought together over a number of years through the entrepreneurial bridging of structural holes by the principals, particularly by Stewart Brand. Early members, such as Douglas Engelbart, Mary Catherine Bateson, biologist Lynn Margulis, and ecologist Peter Warshall, represented Brand’s time at the Whole Earth Catalog and CoEvolution Quarterly and his journeys to SRI and Xerox PARC. Others, such as computer scientist Danny Hillis and sociologist Sherry Turkle, suggested Brand’s links to MIT. Together, the network members represented a handful of groups: computer technologists, economists and financial analysts, corporate executives, natural scientists, journalists, and technology-oriented artists. They also had a distinctly male and, as journalist Joel Garreau put it with consummate tact, “Anglo-American cast.” Of the 90 network members in place in 1994, only 15 were women, and only 3 were non-Caucasian.29

Although a few network members quietly complained about the lack of diversity at GBN, Brand later suggested that it was both a product and a productive feature of the network organizational form. When the founders sought network members, Brand recalled, they looked for “people we knew and liked and respected” who could “inform and titillate.” On the one hand, much like the New Communalists, Brand and the founders hoped to found a nonhierarchical, collaborative alternative to mainstream, vertical bureaucracies. To that end, they turned away from the rigid hiring practices and clear employment boundaries that characterized mainstream firms and toward network entrepreneurship as an organizing force. On the other hand, like the back-to-the-landers, they ended up drawing new members from their own social and cultural communities of origin. Within GBN, this shared cultural affinity took the place of other forms of management. Like the Merry Pranksters, the network members of GBN were a loose group, able to come and go as they pleased. Yet they were also subject to what Brand called “second-order accountability.” As Brand put it, “Nepotism works so long as the whole system isn’t corrupt. Your cousin better deliver or he’s going to hear about it.”30

The social and cultural homogeneity of the GBN network worked hand in hand with an ethos of openness to allow GBN clients and members to engage in interpersonal and for-profit forms of interaction simultaneously. GBN, like the WELL, functioned as a heterarchy within which a member’s or a client’s contribution could have value in multiple domains. Consider the criteria for network membership, for instance. Joel Garreau later explained it this way: “‘Membership’ is a tricky word at GBN; there is no

initiation ritual. One simply gets more and more tangled in its swirling mists. I was first asked to join a discussion on the network’s private BBS [on the WELL]. Then I started receiving books that members thought I might find interesting. Then I got invited to gatherings at fascinating places, from Aspen to Amsterdam. Finally, I was asked to help GBN project the future regarding subjects about which I had expertise. By then, the network seemed natural.” As Garreau’s experience suggests, an individual’s social style worked together with her or his access to and command over new forms of information to make a member “interesting.” Network members were never paid simply to be listed as members of the network. Once recognized as a “remarkable person,” though, the member might be hired for specific consulting projects. In the meantime, he or she gained access to a carefully selected and highly accomplished network of individuals and organizations in a semisocial manner. A member could participate as much as she or he liked, contributing and profiting accordingly. Likewise, corporate clients could begin to think of themselves not only as paying consumers of information, but as members of an elite social group. Having recharacterized their relationship to GBN, having seen it as social as well as economic, clients could in turn become producers of value for one another. Peter Schwartz later wrote, “With our atmosphere of openness, clients began to contribute not just as information users, but as sources.”31 Like network members, clients could simply listen, they could contribute information, or they could contribute in ways that enhanced both collective access to information and their own reputations. Over time, they could and did begin to build new professional as well as interpersonal and intellectual networks. Through GBN meetings, many corporate clients encountered not only network members, but other paying customers with whom they could in turn build professional relationships outside GBN.

Many of those encounters took place at WorldView Meetings and at associated “Learning Journeys.” As Brand and his colleagues had done for the Learning Conferences, the organizers of WorldView Meetings sought to maximize the relationship between the particular themes of a meeting and the place at which the meeting was held. Over its first ten years, GBN held more than thirty meetings. Some meeting themes, such as “Environmental Technology” (for a gathering held in 1991 at the Monterey Bay Aquarium) or “Business and Social Responsibility” (for one at The Hague in 1997), reflected long-standing countercultural concerns. Others, such as “Environment as Infrastructure” (held at Biosphere 2 in 1990) and “Complex Adaptive Systems” (at the Santa Fe Institute in 1991), reflected GBN’s ongoing concern with the legacy of cybernetics. Most, however, brought elements of both those traditions to bear on questions of economic change.

“The Network Corporation,” “The Future of Information Services,” “Risk Within and Beyond the Organization,” and “Restructuring the Global Economy” are just a few of the themes around which meetings were organized in the early 1990s. For GBN’s corporate clients, WorldView Meetings became a prime site for exploring the dynamics of emerging economic forms in terms set by the synthesis of countercultural and cybernetic practices and ideals. By the same token, for network members with backgrounds in those traditions, the meetings became places where they could reorient their social and technological aspirations toward the resources and the needs of the corporate realm.

A close look at any one of these meetings suggests that they served as important forums for the construction of both new networks and a new rhetoric of networks. They also offered participants a chance to imagine themselves as members of a mobile elite, able to glimpse in the natural and economic systems around them the invisible laws according to which all things functioned. In July 1993, for instance, ecologist Peter Warshall led a small number of GBN network members and clients on a multiday rafting trip near Taos, New Mexico. Participants represented GBN’s varied constituencies and included Mary Catherine Bateson; Brand’s wife, Patty Phelan; former Grateful Dead manager Jon McIntire; anthropologist and network theorist Karen Stephenson; neurobiologist William Calvin; futurist Don Michael; consumer analyst Steve Barnett; and Paris-based vice-chairman of L’Oréal Robert Salmon. Guided by Warshall, they rafted down the Rio Chama, a tributary of the Rio Grande, examining local flora and fauna and pausing to visit villagers, sheep farmers, and a local fish hatchery.

In his report on the event for Netview, GBN’s quarterly in-house magazine, Warshall later wrote, “It’s hard for me to say just what others gained from the trip. My purpose was to open the ‘nature book’ and teach the reading of waterflow and landscape.” Yet, as Warshall’s report reveals, for many of the participants, the river itself and the people along it served as a source of metaphors by which the group could come together on the trip and by which they could later seek to understand the social, and especially the economic, world. At the start of the journey, Stewart Brand asked the group to keep notes in small, portable journals. Jon McIntire recorded the following in his journal: “New Words . . . from Bruce the boatman . . . Keeper hole: A current out of the mainstream that captures and holds water in a rapid circular motion. More dangerous than a keeper eddy. According to the boatman, it is nearly impossible to row or paddle out of a keeper hole; outside intervention is almost always necessary.” Like a cybernetician, McIntire read the water as an emblem of social process, inadvertently echoing Norbert Wiener’s words in The Human Use of Human Beings: “We are but

whirlpools in a river of ever-flowing water. We are not stuff that abides, but patterns that perpetuate themselves.” Similarly, Warshall reports that Don Michael transformed the survival strategies of local flowers into emblems of corporate survival tactics. Michael wrote, “A shooting star flower mimics penstemons but does not do the work needed to produce nectar. It cons the hummingbird into fertilizing it in the mistaken belief there is nectar to be had. Much advertising does the same.”32

For the GBN travelers, as for the communards who had come to the same area twenty-five years earlier, the landscape of the West was a setting for ruminating on the proper way of living under conditions of increasing techno-social integration. For the 1993 event, local citizens of Las Truchas and Los Ojos, towns along the way, played a variation of the role Native Americans had played for the counterculture. On the one hand, they seemed to possess an enviable authenticity. As Warshall put it, “The huge contrast with the lives of most GBN members was a curious mirror: the cosmopolitan ambitions, the going into nature as a vacation, the globe trotting, the work place far away from home life. Can consultants or transnational cosmopolitans give practical advice to villagers?”33 But on the other hand, the villagers seemed bogged down, unwilling to change or to acknowledge the new technological and social realities of their world. “There was a quiet ‘post-modernist’ skepticism among many [GBN] members,” wrote Warshall. “Many of the villagers’ decisions appeared suboptimal because they only thought one or two steps ahead of the moment.”34 For the GBN travelers, the local citizenry, like the landscape itself, was not so much a living entity in its own right as a text to be read for clues as to how GBNers ought to organize their lives in light of the various technological and social “systems” within which they lived.

For all the materiality of rivers and mud and boats, the Rio Chama journey, like the communal migrations of the back-to-the-landers, took participants into a deeply semiotic region, one in which the exigencies of everyday life assumed an informational cast and where being informed and thinking in cybernetic terms came to seem to be much the same thing. This pattern characterized GBN’s scenario process as well. Like the Learning Conferences and the WorldView Meetings, scenario-building workshops aimed to make visible the hidden informational systems of their participants. In the process, as Schwartz and Brand wrote in 1989, GBN promised to allow corporations and their executives to “embrace uncertainty (by exploring alternative futures) and to navigate through complexity (by invoking the organizing power of storytelling).” To build scenarios, GBN consultants acted as network entrepreneurs within their client firms. They selected relevant players, brought them together, and had them engage in a series of guided

discussions. Like GBN’s various meetings, the sessions were designed to generate shared understandings of the group’s strategic situation, a new shared rhetoric for articulating those understandings, and new social and (via computer systems such as the WELL and internal corporate systems) technological networks for disseminating and preserving those insights. Each workshop produced a series of stories, often three, about possible future trajectories of the issues at hand. Sometimes the stories would present a clear market opportunity. For AT&T, for instance, several of GBN’s early scenarios suggested that mobile telecommunications such as cell phones would soon undergo rapid growth.35 More often, though, the scenario planning process itself generated a shared rhetoric and social process around which managers could continue to plan for the future. To the extent that the scenario-building process, like other GBN events, built symbolic resources and social networks simultaneously, it modeled and imparted a networked style of working to GBN clients.

The network style could hit clients with the force of revelation. In 1995 Brad Hoyt, a senior project manager at Senco, a Cincinnati toolmaker, recalled a scenario-planning session with Stewart Brand: “He changed my whole life in one scenario planning session. He asked whether we’d heard about complexity theory. . . . Little did I know he’s on the board of the Santa Fe Institute.”36 Over the next year, Hoyt reported reading another dozen books on complexity and came to use complexity theory as a guide to “thinking about the housing industry and other ecosystems affecting Senco.” For executives like Hoyt, the systems-oriented rhetoric of complexity theory, buttressed by the cultural legitimacy of Stewart Brand, offered a compelling framework within which to understand the topsy-turvy economy of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Even at firms with more skeptical executives, GBN quietly brought into the corporate world people and publications that both promoted and modeled a networked sensibility. At Xerox, for instance, Brand introduced executives to the work of Richard Normann, author of the book Designing Interactive Strategy and a proponent of viewing individual firms not as stand-alone industrial competitors, but as elements within a web of economic relationships. In 1995 Robert Mauceli, director of strategic development and communications at Xerox, told a reporter for Fortune magazine, “We were very taken by Normann and invited him to speak to 500 of our executives this summer. We already use some of his stuff in work we’ve done. Now we’re thinking of bringing him back.” Tom Portante, cofounder of Andersen Consulting’s technology assessment group, told the same reporter, “It’s funny . . . you sometimes look at these books Stewart sends and think, ‘What the hell am I supposed to do with those?’ But they disappear, and we routinely have roundtable discussions on them.”37

For executives like Mauceli, Hoyt, and Portante, the overlapping interpersonal, interinstitutional, and informational networks of GBN served as a channel through which the systems rhetoric that had emerged out of and helped to organize collaborative technological research during World War II and the cold war could once again enter the corporate sphere. This time, though, it came with the countercultural legitimacy of Stewart Brand. In keeping with the New Communalist turn away from government, GBN promoted the corporation as a site of revolutionary social change and interpersonal and information networks (including the computerized networks of EIES and the WELL) as tools and emblems of that change. Throughout the 1990s, until it was sold in 2001 to the Monitor Group, a strategic consulting firm (where it continues today), GBN’s work reversed the countercultural antipathy toward industry and the military. In its consulting, the same corporate and military institutions that the New Communalists and the New Left had condemned became homes to the transformed states of mind and leveled bureaucracies that the counterculturalists had worked so hard to create.

Kevin Kelly as Network Entrepreneur For the founders of GBN, computer networks were but one in a series of overlapping systems that included member networks, meeting series, subscriptions to newsletters and book clubs, and ongoing conversations on the WELL. Computers helped sustain GBN and, to that extent, helped give its members a glimpse into the role computer networks might play in the New Economy. The metaphor of the network within GBN referred not so much to digital technologies, however, as to a series of intersecting social and informational systems. For the founders of GBN, computers were only one of several forces driving the leveling of bureaucracies and the rise of networked patterns of organization.

For Kevin Kelly, in contrast, computers became the signal emblems of a new era in human development. In the late 1980s, Kelly extended the social and institutional networks Brand had first knit together, reaching deep into the technical communities of the Bay area and beyond. By the mid-1990s, he had transformed those networks into prototypes of what he believed to be a new social order: neobiological civilization.

Kelly signed on as the editor of CoEvolution Quarterly in 1984, just as Brand was developing the Whole Earth Software Catalog. Since the early 1970s, Kelly had immersed himself in the Quarterly and in the original Whole Earth Catalog (“I have that thing practically memorized,” he later remembered).38 Yet, when he arrived in Sausalito, the various Whole Earth

publications had begun a wholesale turn away from their down-home roots in the back-to-the-land movement and toward digital technologies. Within a year of his arrival, Kelly had helped host the first Hackers’ Conference, joined the WELL, and seen CoEvolution Quarterly merge with the Whole Earth Software Review to become the Whole Earth Review. Over the next half dozen years, as he edited the Review and as he wrote his compendious 1994 volume Out of Control: The Rise of Neo-Biological Civilization, Kelly would attempt to apprehend the technological and cultural shifts around him by deploying the entrepreneurial networking and editorial tactics that Brand had earlier developed at the Whole Earth Catalog. These tactics enabled Kelly not only to link new forms of computing and commerce to the Whole Earth community’s long-standing synthesis of cybernetic theory and countercultural politics, but also to transform both digital technologies and the New Economy into Darwinian variations on a New Communalist ideal.

When CoEvolution Quarterly became the Whole Earth Review in 1984, Kelly inherited a growing network of potential writers and sources, one that increasingly spanned countercultural and technical communities. Kelly soon began to publish writers who had first appeared on the WELL or in connection with either the Hackers’ Conference or the Software Catalog, such as Steven Levy and Howard Rheingold. As Kelly began to travel in the Bay area’s digital circles, and especially as he and other Whole Earth regulars became interested in the emerging technologies of virtual reality, he picked up new writers. In 1989, for instance, he published an interview with novelist William Gibson, as well as a “Cyberpunk 101” reading list. He also published a lengthy interview with virtual-reality entrepreneur Jaron Lanier, an article by computer maven Esther Dyson, and Stewart Brand’s own description of his first immersion in virtual reality, “Sticking Your Head in Cyberspace.” And in the fall of 1990, he published the WELL document “Crime and Puzzlement,” in which John Perry Barlow first used the word cyberspace to describe a digital frontier.39

In all of these cases, Kelly relied on an editorial model that mingled the norms and genres of professional journalism with the network-building practices of the Whole Earth Catalog. Occasionally, Kelly aimed to produce the seemingly objective, balanced coverage of an issue that might characterize a more traditional magazine.40 For the most part, though, he used the Whole Earth Review as a forum for particular Bay area networks of which he was becoming an increasingly visible member. Kelly brought together former counterculturalists, contemporary computer technologists, and writers who frequented the WELL with long-standing members of the Whole Earth community, including ecologists, small businessmen, and former communards. The Review looked much more like a mainstream magazine than like

the Catalog: it carried feature articles as well as short reviews, and it did so in a standard, if visibly low-cost, magazine format. And, unlike the Catalog, the Review did not serve as a communication mechanism among its members. If you wanted to meet the networks depicted in or contributing to the Review, you didn’t write in; you signed on to the WELL. But the Review did inherit the Catalog’s reliance on interpersonal networks and its confidence that the members of those networks constituted an emerging avant-garde. Like the Catalog and like the later Wired, the Review mirrored the concerns of a series of communities linked first and foremost by the networking efforts of its editor.

The Review was not the only forum in which Whole Earth precepts and publishing patterns met the digital world, however. In 1988, four years after the Software Catalog had failed, Kelly edited Signal. Published by the Point Foundation, put together largely by Whole Earth regulars, and consisting almost entirely of brief product and book reviews, Signal looked very much like the Whole Earth Catalog. On page 2, readers could find the old statement of purpose (“We are as Gods, and might as well get good at it . . . ”). And on page 3, they could find a picture of Stewart Brand, kicked back in his office chair, a Macintosh computer on his desk. The Macintosh was a tip-off: what the old Whole Earth Catalog had been to the back-to-the-land world of the countercultural revolution, Signal would be to the emerging landscape of the information revolution. In his introduction to the book, Brand explained that the computer on his desk was simply the descendant of the wood stoves and solar-energy systems of the earlier communards. The hairy old hippiecowboy outlaws of twenty years before had been replaced by hackers. And the wholeness of the earth revealed in the NASA photographs on the covers of the old Catalog was no longer simply an image. Thanks to the “allencompassing and planetary” nature of information, Brand wrote, people could now experience a sense of collective unity that the readers of the old Catalog could only imagine.41

Like the Whole Earth Software Catalog, Signal marked an attempt to embed emerging digital technologies within design frameworks and interpersonal networks developed in the Whole Earth community. Like the original Whole Earth Catalog, Signal was organized in categories that could be read as prototypes of one another. There were ten, each containing on average forty items.42 The first category, “Prime Information,” played the role of the former “Whole Systems” section. It featured books on cybernetics, information theory, and even “whole systems,” as the earlier section had. But it also included reviews of newer work, such as Richard Dawkins’s The Selfish Gene and James Gleick’s Chaos. Likewise, the category “Network Societies” featured both news of the latest in networked communications—bulletin

board systems, the WELL, teleconferences—and reviews of radio and filmmaking gear much like the ones that had run in the Catalog twenty years earlier. Within each category, elements long familiar to readers of the Catalog and the CoEvolution Quarterly shared space with the latest in computing and information technology. At the end of the book, Kelly printed the project’s accounts, rendering the project’s whole editorial and financial system visible to readers, just as Brand had always done.

Kelly had intended Signal to be a “prototype for a new kind of magazine.”43 But, like the Software Catalog, Signal was a commercial failure. In both cases, neither the look and feel of the old Catalog nor its editorial mechanics quite fit with the new social and technological environment. In the late 1960s, the Whole Earth Catalog had made an underground network of communitarians visible and available to one another and to mainstream America; by 1988 the computer culture of the San Francisco Bay area was national news. For communards and commune wannabes, the Whole Earth Catalog offered a unique collection of contacts and information sources. But by 1988 people interested in information technology had a wide array of resources they could consult. What Signal and other Whole Earth publications of the late 1980s did offer, though, was a way for their readers to see the new information technologies as extensions of an older countercultural revolution.

Over the next six years, Kelly went on to link that revolution to a new form of one of the defining practices of cold war military research: computer simulation. By the time Kelly published Signal, the availability and increasing power of desktop computers had led an increasing number of scientists to play with algorithms in ways that had once been restricted to the panjandrums of the RAND Corporation and SRI. As Herman Kahn and his colleagues had once simulated the end of life on earth, small groups of scientists, many based in and around Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, began to simulate the creation of biological life. During the same years, a number of economists and pundits, including members of the Global Business Network, began to apply biological metaphors to economic processes. Michael Rothschild, whose 1990 book Bionomics: The Inevitability of Capitalism attempted to turn these metaphors into a school of thought, spoke for many when he wrote, “In the biologic environment, genetic information, recorded in the DNA molecule, is the basis of all life. In the economic environment, technological information, captured in books, blueprints, scientific journals, databases, and the know-how of millions of individuals, is the ultimate source of all economic life.” For many, though not all, adherents to the bionomic viewpoint, the economic environment was by definition capitalistic. As Rothschild put it, “Capitalism [is] the

inevitable, natural state of human economic affairs. Being for or against a natural phenomenon is a waste of time and mental energy.”44

Stefan Helmreich has shown that bionomic ways of thinking and desktop-based computer simulation came together nowhere more powerfully than at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI).45 The institute was founded in 1984 by a group of scientists from Los Alamos National Laboratory who had come to believe that since World War II, the biological, physical, and social sciences had begun to converge.46 Computers, they argued, had made this convergence possible in two ways: first, they had served as tools for examining and modeling the world, and, second, the algorithms with which they organized information mimicked the algorithmic patterning of life itself by means of biological “technologies” such as DNA.47 In many ways, these arguments resuscitated the cybernetic visions of the cold war era. They did so at a very different cultural moment, though, one when the industrial bureaucracies of the 1950s were rapidly giving way to the globalized, flexible, and temporary work world of the post-Fordist era. Moreover, in the mid-1980s, executives worldwide were engaged in computerizing their firms, and many now had computers on their own desktops. To these executives, the neocybernetic perspective of the Santa Fe Institute held great appeal. Within two years of its founding, SFI had attracted a number of corporate sponsors, most notably Citibank/Citicorp. In 1986 Citicorp CEO John Reed asked SFI to sponsor a workshop that was titled “International Finance as a Complex System,” and in 1987 another called “Evolutionary Paths of the Global Economy.”48

In 1987 SFI joined Apple Computer and the Center for Nonlinear Studies at Los Alamos National Laboratory to sponsor the first workshop on artificial life. Hosted at Los Alamos by Christopher Langton, then a postdoctoral researcher at the laboratory, the conference brought together 160 biologists, physicists, anthropologists, and computer scientists. Like the scientists and technicians of the Rad Lab and Los Alamos in World War II, the contributors to the first Artificial Life Conference quickly established an intellectual trading zone. Specialists in robotics presented papers on questions of cultural evolution; computer scientists used new algorithms to model seemingly biological patterns of growth; bioinformatics specialists applied what they believed to be principles of natural ecologies to the development of social structures. For these scientists, as formerly for members of the Rad Lab and the cold war research institutes that followed it, systems theory served as a contact language and computers served as key supports for a systems orientation toward interdisciplinary work. Furthermore, computers granted participants in the workshop a familiar God’s-eye point of view. For the defense analysts and futurists of the 1950s, computers had transformed

the globe into an informational system that could be monitored twenty-four hours a day against the possibility of nuclear attack and the destruction of all human life. For the participants of the first Artificial Life Conference, computers served as windows onto life itself. Peering into their desktop screens, watching images change and grow in patterns made possible by algorithms they themselves had set, the scientists could and did imagine themselves, not unlike the early readers of the Whole Earth Catalog, “as gods.”49

For Kevin Kelly, the 1987 conference on artificial life sparked a series of epiphanies. First, it validated the long-standing Whole Earth embrace of systems theory. If the counterculture had faded away, the vision of a world linked by invisible patterns had not. Small-scale technologies such as LSD had suggested the existence of those patterns to hippie adepts, but here were more than 150 scientists, working with the latest digital technologies, who seemed to be coming to the same conclusion. Moreover, like LSD, those computers seemed to make it possible to envision life itself as a whole. If the New Communalists had sensed that they were “all one,” the computers of the Artificial Life Conference seemed to prove the point: The natural world and the social world really were all one system of information exchange. That vision of singularity in turn allowed Kelly to link his religious yearnings to the particular form of sociability common to both the cold war research world and the New Communalist wing of the counterculture: collaborative networks. On the one hand, the God’s-eye point of view shared by the programmers at the conference suggested to Kelly that perhaps God himself had created the world as a set of algorithms, out of which he then let an efflorescence of life forms emerge.50 On the other hand, it suggested that the scientists and sociologists at the conference, gathered in a forum, busily constructing new social networks, were themselves the vanguard of the future. Computers; collaborative scientists; invisible, informational patterns of interconnection—for Kelly, steeped as he was in the synthesis of cybernetic and New Communalist ideals common to the Whole Earth community, as well as his own idiosyncratic Christianity, each of these elements seemed to mirror the others, and all smacked of the Divine.

The Atom Is the Past, the Network Is the Future Over the next five years, Kelly turned his experiences at the Artificial Life Conference into the basis of a book, Out of Control, that would translate the interpersonal networks and the ethos of the Whole Earth publications into symbolic resources for corporate executives and others seeking to make sense of the post-Fordist economy. Like Stewart Brand twenty-five years earlier, Kelly wanted to make visible a new mode of being that he himself

had discovered by migrating across the boundaries of various social, institutional, and technological networks. In his reporting, he brought together representatives of four communities: descendants of the cold war research world (including Los Alamos, MIT’s Media Lab, and Xerox PARC), affiliates of the Whole Earth (ecologists, writers from the WELL), designers and theorists of new forms of computing (artificial life, multiple-user dungeons, Sim Earth), and corporations (Benetton, Pixar, Disney). With the exception of the corporate world, all of these groups had had a long-standing presence in the Whole Earth publications. In the pages of Out of Control, Kelly arrayed his subjects one after another, as if they were samples in a catalog. In the late 1960s, in the pages of the Whole Earth Catalog, the moccasins and backpacks of those lighting out for the woods had bumped up against the calculators and technical manuals of Bay area engineers. Now, in the early 1990s, computer scientists met prairie ecologists, online gamers, and corporate executives.

The book’s catalog-like structure supported its cybernetic themes. Each of its twenty-four chapters developed a topic that in some way illustrated the intersection of the biological, the technological, and the social. Some chapters, such as “Coevolution” and “The Structure of Organized Change,” reflected long-standing Whole Earth concerns. Others, such as “Artificial Evolution” and “Postdarwinism” dealt with issues arising at the intersection of biology and informatics. Still others, such as “Network Economics” and “E-Money” pointed to new, networked forms of enterprise and the role played by computers in such systems. Yet, according to Kelly, any one of these chapters might serve as a mirror for the others. As he explained at the start of his book, “The apparent veil between the organic and the manufactured has crumpled to reveal that the two really are, and have always been, of one being.”51 What had joined the two was information, especially the work of computer scientists at places like the Santa Fe Institute. Technologists, he explained, had begun “extracting the logical principle of both life and machines, and applying each to the task of building extremely complex systems.” Echoing the claims of artificial-life researchers, Kelly argued that these systems were simultaneously “made and alive”: “What should we call that common soul between the organic communities we know of as organisms and ecologies, and their manufactured counterparts of robots, corporations, economies, and computer circuits? I call those examples, both made and born, ‘vivisystems’ for the lifelikeness each kind of system holds.”52

On the one hand, Kelly’s account of “vivisystems” owed a substantial debt to the legacy of Norbert Wiener’s cybernetics. Kelly even went so far as to suggest that “a short-hand synopsis of Out of Control would be to say it

is an update on the current state of cybernetic research.” On the other hand, in keeping with Kelly’s Whole Earth background, the book linked that research to a New Communalist social ideal. For instance, Kelly devoted an early chapter to a phenomenon that he called “hive mind.” The chapter opened with a discussion of bees and beekeeping, in which Kelly described the hives he kept outside his house as single, collective organisms. The scene then shifted to the backyard of Kelly’s friend and fellow beekeeper Mark Thompson. One day, Thompson saw a bee swarm forming up: “Mark didn’t waver. Dropping his tools he slipped into the swarm, his bare head now in the eye of a bee hurricane. He trotted in sync across the yard as the swarm eased away. Wearing a bee halo, Mark hopped over one fence, then another. He was now running to keep up with the thundering animal in whose belly he floated.”53 Eventually, the unstung Thompson stumbled, and the swarm went on without him. For Kelly, the swarm served as an emblem of a new form of social organization. Although the hive had a queen, he pointed out, it was governed by the rule-driven behavior of its many members. In the hive one could see “the true nature of democracy and all distributed governance.” One could also see the faded image of New Communalism. Leveled, collaborative, linked by invisible signals and shared feelings, Kelly’s hive was a sort of natural commune. “It was a mob,” he wrote, “united into oneness.”54

As his friend’s experience with the swarm suggested, the hive was also a social system, held together by information exchange, into which human beings could insert themselves. Immediately after describing beehives, Kelly conjured up a conference room in Las Vegas. There he described Loren Carpenter, a software developer, booting up an old game of Pong. He gave each member of the audience a lighted wand and then, with custom-designed software, engaged them in a process of keeping a ball moving back and forth across a computer screen projected at the front of the room. When the group had mastered that exercise, Carpenter had them use the same wands to create numbers on the screen and ultimately to pilot an airplane flight simulator. After a few dangerous pitches and rolls, the crowd managed to right the plane and turn it in a new direction. “No one was in charge,” wrote Kelly, yet the crowd acted as if it was “of one mind.”55

What had made visible the group’s oneness was the power of collective computing. The computer had revealed a hidden order to collective action; at the same time, it had helped to create a collaborative social group. Kelly showed in this way that computers had fostered the creation of a New Communalist ideal. They had transformed the consciousness of the individuals in the room and, by doing so, made possible the destruction of

political hierarchy, the elimination of psychological boundaries between the individual and the group, and the establishment of a powerful social whole. Moreover, Kelly preceded this story by the account of his neighbor’s bees and followed it with a discussion of yet another “hive mind,” in an anthill. For all its technological advancement, this ordering suggested, the computer was in fact deeply in accord with natural principles. Like the geodesic domes and camping gear favored by the New Communalists, the computer had in fact helped its users integrate their lives more closely with the “laws” of nature.

The new hive mind represented the sort of world-saving social revolution that many New Communalists had hoped to spark. According to Kelly, the Pong game, the bee swarm, and the anthill were all examples of “parallel operating wholes.” These wholes could be called “networks, complex adaptive systems, swarm systems, vivisystems, or collective systems.”56 Whatever they were called, together they would overthrow the rigid, hierarchical logic of the old atomic era: “The Atom is the icon of 20th century science. . . . The Atom whirls alone, the epitome of singleness. It is the metaphor for individuality: atomic. It is the irreducible seat of strength. The Atom stands for power and knowledge and certainty. It is as dependable as a circle, as regular as round.”57 But now, thanks to new forms of computing and the new, collaborative forms of social organization that they both enabled and modeled, the atom had been driven away:

Another Zen thought: The Atom is the past. The symbol of science for the

next century is the dynamical Net.

The Net icon has no center—it is a bunch of dots connected to other dots—

a cobweb of arrows pouring into each other, squirming together like a nest of

snakes, the restless image fading at indeterminate edges. The Net is the arche-

type—always the same picture— displayed to represent all circuits, all intelli-

gence, all interdependence, all things economic and social and ecological, all

communications, all democracy, all groups, all large systems.58

In Out of Control, however, Kelly took pains to show how the Net was above all the symbol of a post-Fordist economic order. One the one hand, Kelly implied, networked systems, and particularly computer systems, would lead humanity back toward a reintegration with nature—an ability to run with the bees, so to speak. On the other hand, he suggested, this reintegration would take place within the heart of the corporate world. Like the New Communalists thirty years earlier, Kelly turned away from any notion of political struggle and toward the commercial sphere as a site of social change. That sphere, he argued, was itself already a model of the natural

world. Like hives of bees or anthills or computers, the economy was governed by an “Invisible Hand.” Like the vivisystems of nature, the ideal corporation should be “distributed, decentralized, collaborative, and adaptive.”59 The firm, he explained, had become an organism, and through the proper deployment of technology, and especially information technology, it could return both workers and machines to a more natural way of being:

Industrial ecology must grow into a networked just-in-time system that

dynamically balances the flow of materials so that local overflows and

shortages are shuttled around to minimize variable stocks. More net-driven

“flex-factories” will be able to handle a more erratic quality of resources by

running adaptable machinery or making fewer units of more different kinds

of products.

Technologies of adaptation, such as distributed intelligence, flex-time

accounting, niche economics, and supervised evolution, all stir up the organic

in machines.60

In the pages of Out of Control, Kelly transformed the New Communalist dream of a rural Eden, of an antitechnocratic reintegration with nature, into a celebration of information technology, post-Fordist production practices, and the entrepreneurial engineers, executives, and scientists who watched over both. Like Stewart Brand and his colleagues at the Global Business Network (of which Kelly was now a member), Kelly had created a series of overlapping networks: social, technological, informational, and natural. In keeping with the universal rhetorical principles of cybernetics, each network legitimated every other. For Kelly, the ability of computers to produce fractal shapes on their monitors served as evidence that fractal formations in the natural world had been produced by informational algorithms embedded in genes and DNA. The existence of ecosystems in nature and the struggles for dominance and position therein seemed to naturalize the increasingly fluid relations of a rapidly globalizing economic world and the struggles for power within it. Networked forms of commerce, and the integration of information technologies into them, quickly began to seem like stages in a natural, rather than a socio-technical, progression. Suddenly mankind had entered a new stage of evolution: the scientists of the artificial-life movement, wrote Kelly, had already shown that “evolution is not a biological process. It is a technological, mathematical, informational, and biological process rolled into one.”61

Soon after the book was released, it became a well of symbolic resources for corporate executives looking to understand the technological and

economic context in which they worked. Reviewers repeatedly took up Kelly’s hive-mind analogies and applied them to the New Economy.62 In 1994, for instance, a reviewer for the august Harvard Business Review argued that Kelly’s “image of 5,000 passengers copiloting a jet neatly captures the promise of work and organization in the New Economy. In the ‘company’ created by Carpenter, everyone makes his or her own decisions, everyone has fun—and the enterprise doesn’t crash and burn. It’s the ultimate goal of building companies around networked computers, mobile communications, and self-managed teams: to marry the competitive demands of business with the desire for personal satisfaction and democratic participation; to achieve productive coordination without top-down control.” In the pages of Out of Control, the Long Hunter of the Whole Earth Catalog had become an entrepreneur. Journalists picked up on the point too. “The renegade competitor,” wrote the Harvard Business Review, “the lone knowledge worker equipped with a laptop, a modem, and an inspired idea—these are our heroes, the change agents who are reinventing industries, reshaping the economy, creating vast wealth.”63 Almost thirty years earlier, thousands of young, highly educated Americans had tromped off into the wilderness seeking to build an egalitarian, fun-loving world. Today, suggested Kelly, they should look to technology and the economy for satisfaction.

They should do so, he argued, because the world itself was an information system. In his view, to manipulate computers and to work with information was not simply to hold down a job; it was to gain access to a hidden world, to live by its laws, and to become in a sense a Comprehensive Designer of one’s own fate. In that sense, Kelly’s vision echoed the New Communalists’ celebration of consciousness. It also resuscitated the communedwellers’ disregard for the demands of the material world. In the 1960s, many had set out for rural America with little sense of the embodied labor that building their new society might take and little feel for the work already done by those among whom they settled. In the 1990s, as a number of critics have noted, Kelly’s doctrine of cyberevolutionism gave a potent ideological boost to executives seeking to outsource labor, automate industrial processes, and decrease the stability of their worker’s employment.64 Throughout his book, Kelly underplayed the work of embodied labor, celebrated intellect and the collaborative styles associated with intellectual institutions, and so offered a model of a world inhabited exclusively by freelancing elites. In the early 1990s, as in the late 1960s, that turn away from the material world helped legitimate the authority of those who controlled information and information systems by rendering invisible those who did not.

At the same time, the turn toward imagining the world in terms of dematerialized networks of information helped assuage the increasing sense of helplessness among executives themselves. On the one hand, like scientists at the Rad Lab a half century earlier, executives could call on the rhetoric of cybernetics to justify the pursuit of their professional goals. Like the cold warriors who had long ago scanned their computer screens for signs of incoming bombers, they could imagine the world as an information system and themselves as monitors of that system. Thanks to the computers they were so rapidly installing in their firms, they could see farther, plan more effectively, and perhaps manage their firms “as gods.” On the other hand, they could begin to accept that they lacked precisely the sorts of power that Stewart Brand and others of his generation imagined belonged to corporate leaders. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, despite the spike in executive incomes and the broad-based movement of wealth toward those at the top of the social ladder, many executives labored under a sense that they were surrounded by forces beyond their control.65 In the cybernetic pages of his book, Kevin Kelly suggested that yes, in fact, they were—and that it was okay, even natural, to feel at sea.

Toward the end of the Harvard Business Review’s analysis of Out of Control, its author offered a single, pointed criticism. “The missing ingredient in biology,” he wrote, “is values.”66 The most successful firms worked well together, he argued, not simply because they were efficiently organized, but because they shared a set of core beliefs. Yet, in the case of Kelly’s book, and in the case of the Global Business Network, the turn toward biology did not reflect an abandonment of values and a simple embrace of rapacious capitalism. On the contrary, it marked the integration of the New Communalist ideals of egalitarian collaboration and spiritual interconnection with the scientific celebration of interdisciplinary work and unifying theory. It also pointed toward the increasing power of networked elites and of social norms, as opposed to formal organizational structures, in governing those elites. In the Global Business Network, social affinity became a key element of network coherence; in the pages of Kelly’s book, it was simply an unspoken element linking his various scientific entrepreneurs. In both cases, Kelly and Brand offered up their own entrepreneurial, male, predominantly Anglo-American social networks as emblems of the technological and economic networks emerging around them.

In the coming years, Brand continued to stay involved with the Global Business Network and the Electronic Frontier Foundation, but he also turned to other projects. In 1994, for instance, he published a book on the ways buildings change over time (How Buildings Learn), and in 1995 he

helped found the Long Now Foundation, a society devoted to building a clock that would keep time for ten thousand years, so as to encourage humans to focus on the long-term consequences of their actions.67 Kevin Kelly became executive editor of Wired magazine. In that capacity, he helped turn the social networks that he and Brand had helped create into symbols of the rise of a newly networked social order and evidence for the countercultural potential of the Internet and the World Wide Web.
