---
book: "From Counterculture to Cyberculture"
author: "Fred Turner"
section_kind: "Ch7"
section: "Wired"
source_pages: "218-247"
type: source
---

# Wired

In Wired’s March 1993 inaugural issue, founder and editor-in-chief Louis Rossetto proclaimed that a cultural transformation was under way. “The Digital Revolution is whipping through our lives like a Bengali typhoon,” he announced, bringing with it “social changes so profound their only parallel is probably the discovery of fire.”1 The magazine itself seemed to illustrate his point. Tricked out in a cacophony of type faces, swimming in a sea of Day-Glo orange and chartreuse, Wired was explicitly designed to conjure up the multimedia possibilities of digital convergence. To readers of that first issue, long accustomed to the traditional aesthetics and consumer orientation of the mainstream computer press, Wired aimed to herald the arrival not only of a new era in computing machinery, but a new era in social life. “There are a lot of magazines about technology,” wrote Rossetto. “Wired is not one of them. Wired is about the most powerful people on the planet today—the Digital Generation. These are the people who not only foresaw how the merger of computers, telecommunications and the media is transforming life at the cusp of the new millennium, they are making it happen.”2

Almost immediately, readers began to believe that Wired and the executives and engineers it profiled might in fact be harbingers of the future. Over the next five years, the magazine became a touchstone for CEOs, politicians, and, above all, other journalists. It won two National Magazine Awards, saw its readership grow to more than three hundred thousand a month, developed a book publisher (HardWired) and a variety of online ventures (HotWired, Suck), and helped spawn a clutch of magazines focused on the Internet and the New Economy, including Fast Company, Business 2.0, the Industry Standard, and Red

Herring. Thanks in part to a confluence of extraordinary economic, technological, and political currents, its technocentric optimism became a central feature of the biggest stock market bubble in American history. Its faith that the Internet constituted a revolution in human affairs legitimated calls for telecommunications deregulation and the dismantling of government entitlement programs elsewhere as well. And each month, its Technicolor pages of gadgets and gurus cataloged the delights awaiting information professionals in the New Economy.

Yet, for all its forward-looking verve, Wired’s vision of the digital future also carried with it a particular version of the countercultural past. In its pages, desktop computers and the Internet became tools for personal and collective liberation in a distinctly Whole Earth vein. “The ’60s generation had a lot of power, but they didn’t have a lot of tools,” explained Jane Metcalfe, cofounder and president of Wired, as well as Rossetto’s wife. “And in many respects their protests were unable to implement long-term and radical change in our society. We do have the tools. The growth of the Internet and the growing political voice of the people on the Internet is proof of that.”3 In the pages of Wired, the Internet, and digital communication generally, stood as a prototype of a newly decentralized, nonhierarchical society linked by invisible bits in a single harmonious network. The builders of computers and telecommunications networks, suggested Wired—men like John Malone of TV cable behemoth TCI, Frank Biondi and Ed Horowitz of Viacom, and Bill Gates of Microsoft—were working to construct the hightech infrastructure of a new and better world. So too were libertarian pundits and politicians. In the logic of Wired, they were simply social, as opposed to technical, engineers. Like their brethren in Silicon Valley, conservative author and media analyst George Gilder, futurist Alvin Toffler, and Republican Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich were working to bring about individual liberation and government by contract and code. Together, Wired seemed to suggest, these two communities had set about to free America and the world from the rigid, oppressive corporate and government bureaucracies of the twentieth century.

In 1998 Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron named Wired’s particular blend of libertarian politics, countercultural aesthetics, and techno-utopian visions the “Californian Ideology.” As they pointed out, by the end of the decade, its tenets had become the day-to-day orthodoxy of technologists in Silicon Valley and beyond. But this ubiquitous set of beliefs did not in fact grow out of the legacy of the New Left, as Barbrook and Cameron suggested. Rather, a close look at Wired’s first and most influential five years suggests that the magazine’s vision of the digital horizon emerged in large part from its intellectual and interpersonal affiliations with Kevin Kelly and the Whole

Earth network and, through them, from the New Communalist embrace of the politics of consciousness.4

Although Louis Rossetto and Jane Metcalfe founded Wired, and although Rossetto’s libertarian politics exerted a substantial influence on the magazine, Rossetto and Metcalfe also drew heavily for funds and, later, for subjects and writers, on the Whole Earth world. In 1992, while Kevin Kelly was finishing up Out of Control, Rossetto hired him to serve as executive editor of the magazine. Kelly brought with him the simultaneously cybernetic and New Communalist social vision of the Whole Earth publications and their networked style of editorial work. Together with Rossetto and managing editor John Battelle, Kelly turned Wired into a network forum. Within it, writers utilized the computational metaphors and universal rhetoric of cybernetics to depict New Right politicians, telecommunications CEOs, information pundits, and members of GBN, the WELL, and other Whole Earth– connected organizations as a single, leading edge of countercultural revolution. Together, Wired suggested, this digital generation would do what the New Communalists had failed to accomplish: they would tear down hierarchies, undermine the sorts of corporations and governments that had spawned them, and, in the hierarchies’ place, create a peer-to-peer, collaborative society, interlinked by invisible currents of energy and information.

By the end of the decade, theirs would be the governing myth of the Internet, the stock market, and great swaths of the New Economy.

Founding Wired For all his magazine’s countercultural rhetoric, Louis Rossetto saw the digital revolution as an extension of a long-standing, if not widely acknowledged, American libertarian tradition. After growing up in suburban Long Island, Rossetto had arrived at Columbia University in 1967. By that time, the Vietnam War was nearing its apogee, as were antiwar protests and domestic violence. In April 1968, less than three weeks after the assassination of Martin Luther King, a group of students occupied buildings on Columbia’s main quad to protest the university’s involvement in military research and its mismanagement of relations with the local African American community. Columbia’s president responded by calling in more than one thousand police in the middle of the night. They arrested 692 strikers and cleared out the buildings. As Todd Gitlin has pointed out, the occupation at Columbia marked a turning point for the SDS and the New Left generally.5 In the years to come, antiwar protests turned increasingly violent, with bombings by young leftists and attacks by police on marchers becoming common.

To Louis Rossetto, this shift suggested the futility of agonistic politics as a whole. Rossetto had served as the president of the Columbia Young Republicans, campaigned for Nixon, and celebrated Nixon’s election in 1968 with other Republicans at New York’s Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. By his junior year, though, he had begun to think of himself as a libertarian anarchist. That year, he gathered a group of like-minded friends into a loose confederation they called the Freedom Conspiracy. He read psychologist Wilhelm Reich’s calls for sexual freedom and Marshall McLuhan’s multimedia collage books, and at the same time discovered Ayn Rand. In his senior year, he wrote a long paper on the libertarian stream in American thought, in which he chronicled the work of long-forgotten figures such as Benjamin Tucker, a turn-of-the-century editor of the magazine Liberty and an ardent follower of social Darwinist Herbert Spencer, and Lysander Spooner, an abolitionist and the operator of a private postal service that he created to challenge the government’s monopoly on the mails. In 1971 Rossetto and his friend Stan Lehr published a lengthy article in the New York Times Magazine entitled “The New Right Credo—Libertarianism.” In it they argued that “liberalism, conservatism and leftist radicalism are all bankrupt philosophies. The only question at issue among their adherents is which gang of crooks and charlatans is to rule society, and for what noble purpose.” As Rossetto recalled nearly thirty years later, “it wasn’t a Buckleyite conservatism that got me—it was the individualist, anti-statist conservatism that got me.” At about the same time that Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters were rejecting the politics of the New Left and the hippies of the Haight were heading back to the land, Rossetto was coming to a similarly antipolitical position. In his work with the Young Republicans, he later remembered, he had come to believe that “in order to influence [the political world] you had to become it. The best way to change things was to walk away. . . . You had to start with yourself.”6

In 1973 Rossetto earned an MBA from Columbia. Over the next decade, though, he drifted. He wrote a novel entitled Takeover about an American president who avoids impeachment by faking a national security crisis; the novel appeared a week before Richard Nixon resigned, and it received little attention. Some years later, he found himself in Rome, working on the set of the film Caligula. He decided to use the orgies he had seen on the set as a metaphor for the sexual revolution and penned a book called Ultimate Porno. Like Takeover, it vanished quickly. Finally, in the mid-1980s, Rossetto found his way to Ink, an Amsterdam-based translation firm that served high-tech companies. He produced a magazine for them in which the company could advertise its translation software. Gradually, he began to cover other technologies, including desktop publishing, CD-ROMs, and the like. In 1986 the

magazine became Language Technology, and in 1988, Electric Word. Jane Metcalfe, whom Rossetto had met during a stint in Paris several years earlier, joined Rossetto and became marketing director for the magazine.

For Rossetto and Metcalfe, the magazine provided a vehicle with which to build the networks on which Wired would later depend. In 1988 Rossetto read Time magazine’s report on the Media Lab and sought out Nicholas Negroponte for an interview. He later found his way to hypertext guru Ted Nelson and to Richard Saul Wurman, the host of one of the most important networking events in the computer industry, the soon-to-be-annual Technology, Entertainment, and Design (TED) Conference. In 1988 Kevin Kelly gave Electric Word an enthusiastic review in Signal, thus alerting a number of San Francisco Bay area technology journalists to its existence.

Around the time when the Signal review appeared, Rossetto began visiting the United States in the hope of bringing the magazine there. New York City journalist Michael Wolff met with Rossetto as a favor to a friend. “I opened the door to a Christ-like figure with dramatic hair and a rucksack over his shoulder,” Wolff later recalled. “He had watery eyes, a caring, ‘I have been hurt’ voice, and an otherworldly presence. . . . I thought he was a lost soul.”7 Rossetto and Metcalfe also made a trip through California at about this time and met with Kevin Kelly as well. Kelly was not much more interested than Wolff had been, at least at first.8 By 1991, though, Electric Word had gone out of business and Rossetto and Metcalfe had moved to New York. They brought with them the idea for a new lifestyle-andtechnology magazine, to be called first Millennium, and later Wired. In February 1992, they attended Wurman’s TED conference and carried with them a prototype of their new magazine to show one of the conference’s speakers, Nicholas Negroponte. Unlike Wolff and Kelly, Negroponte was impressed. He arranged meetings for them with a series of media moguls, including Henry Kravitz, S. I. Newhouse Jr., Michael Eisner, Ted Turner, Rupert Murdoch, and Christy Hefner, and all declined their requests for funding.9 Later that year, Negroponte himself became the magazine’s first investor, ponying up $75,000 in return for a 10 percent stake in the magazine and promising to write a monthly column as well. He also persuaded Charles Jackson, CEO of Silicon Beach Software, to invest another $150,000 in the magazine.

With this, Rossetto and Metcalfe, together with the magazine’s designers, John Plunkett and Barbara Kuhr, moved to San Francisco, started a conference on the WELL, and began seeking staff for the magazine. On the financial side, they created a series of business plans and began showing them to potential contributors. When they met with Bruce Katz, then head of the WELL, he referred them to Peter Schwartz. Schwartz in turn passed

them to Global Business Network cofounder Lawrence Wilkinson. Wilkinson invested both his own money and that of the Global Business Network in the magazine and introduced Rossetto and Metcalfe to bankers at the firm of Sterling Payot, who ultimately provided several hundred thousand dollars in funds. Wilkinson went on to become the magazine’s chief financial strategist. On the editorial side, Rossetto and Metcalfe created another, more fully developed prototype of the magazine, complete with a glossy look and feel, flashy graphics, and actual stories. Up until he saw this prototype, Kevin Kelly had been watching Rossetto and Metcalfe from a distance, expecting them to fail. But, says Kelly, “The minute I saw the [new] prototype I knew it was going to work.”10 For Kelly, Wired marked a logical extension of the work he had been doing at the Whole Earth Review and that others had been doing at Mondo 2000. Both of those publications had begun to merge lifestyle issues and technology, but always with the low-rent production values of underground periodicals. Finally, Kelly thought, here was a magazine that would get the attention that the Whole Earth Review and Mondo had both deserved. Kelly signed on as executive editor, and in June of 1992 he joined Rossetto, Metcalfe, and Wilkinson on the board of the newly formed Wired Ventures.

New Technology, New Economy, New Right Even before they published their first issue, then, Rossetto and Metcalfe had stitched Wired into the social fabric of the Whole Earth world. They had found their financial strategist in the Global Business Network and a key editor in the Whole Earth Review; as the magazine ramped up, they would find many writers and ideas for stories in their conference on the WELL. Over time, these connections would link Rossetto’s own long-standing antistatism to the New Communalist vision of an ideal social order born from the transformation of consciousness.

They would also connect both intellectual traditions with a series of extraordinary transformations in computing technology, the American economy, and American political life. By the time Wired’s first issue appeared in March of 1993, desktop computers had become common features of homes and offices nationwide. The cost of computing was plummeting. According to one economist, between 1987 and 1995, the price of computing power decreased an average of 14.7 percent a year; from 1996 to 1999, it fell 31.2 percent a year. Thanks to their licensing practices, Microsoft and Intel supplied software and hardware, respectively, for a rapidly expanding array of computer manufacturers, including Dell, Compaq, and Gateway. By 1995 Microsoft’s Windows operating system had become a global standard.11

The increasing availability of powerful small computers coincided with the privatization of the Internet backbone, a flowering of commercial networks, and a dramatic increase in public computer networking. In the early 1980s, the Internet backbone was government property. Managed by the Defense Department’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), it joined a set of operational and research networks, most of them connected to military projects. In the late 1980s, the number of academic users increased, and in 1990 ARPA transferred control over the Net to the National Science Foundation (NSF). ARPANET and NSFNET prohibited commercial traffic; but in the 1980s a series of commercial and alternative networks had also sprung up, such that by the late 1980s, millions of Americans were e-mailing one another, participating in online discussions, and posting information. Finally, in April 1995, the NSF relinquished control of the Internet backbone, facilitating the interlinking of commercial, alternative, and government-sponsored networks and the mixing of for-profit and not-forprofit uses across the system.12

By that time, another phenomenon had appeared on the Internet: the World Wide Web. Created in 1990 by Tim Berners-Lee and his colleagues at the Centre Européenne pour la Recherche Nucléaire (CERN), the Web took advantage of the Internet’s information transfer protocols to create a new system of information exchange. Thanks to hyperlinks embedded in documents, as well as the new Universal Resource Locator (URL) system, users could navigate information in new and complex ways. For many, the Internet had long served as a system for the exchange of text messages. With the arrival of the Web, it became a way to publish information, to incorporate multimedia formats, and to quickly and easily connect previously discrete clusters of information.

At first, CERN distributed its Web software principally within the scientific community and Web use grew very slowly. Then, in 1993, a team led by Marc Andreesen, a staffer at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois, developed a new Web browser called Mosaic, which allowed users to embed hyperlinks in images for the first time and also permitted users to post color images within their Web pages. The NCSA made Mosaic available to the public in November 1993, just as Wired magazine’s fifth issue was arriving on newsstands. Users downloaded forty thousand copies of Mosaic in the first month; by the spring of 1994, more than a million copies were in use. The rapid distribution of Mosaic in turn drove growth in the Web itself. In April 1993, the Web featured only 62 servers; by May of 1994, that number had ballooned to 1,248.13 In 1994 Andreesen left the NCSA to found a commercial browser manufacturer, Netscape. The Netscape browser, which was

faster, more secure, and easier to use, helped drive the rise of e-commerce, and in August of 1995, Netscape went public. Its shares doubled in value on the first day of trading.

Over the next five years, use of the Internet and the Web would grow astronomically, and as it did, speculators would bid up the share values of Internet-related stocks to extraordinary heights. Between 1995 and 1999, companies with limited (if any) actual profits saw their stock values grow by as much as 3,000 percent. By the end of the decade, shareholders would witness the inflation of the largest speculative bubble in American economic history. When the bubble first began to grow, Americans did in fact have reason for economic optimism. Just as the Internet and the World Wide Web were coming online, the American economy was enjoying a major expansion. From 1993 to 2000, Americans saw rapid growth in manufacturing output, investment, and worker productivity; at the same time unemployment and inflation sank to levels close to those of the prosperous

*[symbol/figure content not captured in text extraction]*

However, the growth did not derive from productivity increases brought about by the increasing use of computers and computer networks in business. Most growth was concentrated in the 12 percent of the American economy devoted to manufacturing durable goods, including computer hardware and peripherals. Although an increase in the manufacturing of computer hardware certainly boosted the economy overall, the deployment of computers per se did not. By the year 2000, 76.6 percent of all computers used in business were being used in retail and service firms; yet, though such firms accounted for about 75 percent of all business-oriented computer use, this sector of the economy had seen little in the way of productivity gain. Conversely, within the manufacturing sector that was almost exclusively responsible for economic growth in this period, the use of computers—as distinct from the manufacture of computer hardware—had very little measurable effect on productivity.15

Nevertheless, by the end of the decade, computers, telecommunications, and the Internet in particular had seized the public imagination. In part, some have suggested, this came about naturally, as individual users encountered the Internet for the first time. As Nigel Thrift has shown, however, by the end of the 1990s an entire circuit of stock analysts, journalists, publicists, and pundits had also emerged. They spun out a series of self-reinforcing prognostications, and as they did, analysts and investors appeared to come to a consensus: computers were bringing about a New Economy and perhaps even a long economic boom. New, more entrepreneurial forms of corporate organization, rapid investment in high technology, and the ability to corral the intangible knowledge and skills of employees—all seemingly

made possible by the suddenly ubiquitous computer and communication networks—were transforming America and perhaps even bringing an end to the business cycle itself. In 1999 even the exceptionally sober-minded chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, had come on board. With his inimitable diction, he explained to an audience of bankers in Chicago that “a perceptible quickening in the pace at which technological innovations are applied argues for the hypothesis that the recent acceleration in labor productivity is not just a cyclical phenomenon or a statistical aberration, but reflects, at least in part, a more deep-seated, still developing, shift in our economic landscape.”16

This vision of a New Economy was accompanied by an ongoing swing to the right in American corporate and political life. Although Bill Clinton, a centrist Democrat, occupied the White House from 1993 to 2001, the era witnessed an extension of Reagan-era calls for the rollback of government entitlements and the deregulation of industry; there was also an increase in the visibility of the Christian right. The elections of 1994 ushered in the first Republican majority in both houses of Congress for forty years. Led by Newt Gingrich, the House of Representatives in the mid-1990s pushed for the downsizing of government and widespread deregulation— especially in the telecommunications sector. Together with Alvin Toffler, George Gilder, and technology journalist and entrepreneur Esther Dyson, Gingrich argued that America was about to enter a new era, one in which technology would do away with the need for bureaucratic oversight of both markets and politics. As Gingrich and others saw it, deregulation would free markets to become the engines of political and social change that they were meant to be.

Thomas Frank has termed this vision “market populism,” and as he has indicated, in the 1990s it depended on a particular reading of the Internet. If the market was to be a deregulated mechanism of political as well as economic exchange, the recently privatized circuits of the Internet, with their free-flowing streams of commercial and noncommercial bits, made a perfect rhetorical prototype of the market-populist ideal. By the end of the decade, the libertarian, utopian, populist depiction of the Internet could be heard echoing in the halls of Congress, the board rooms of Fortune 500 corporations, the chat rooms of cyberspace, and the kitchens and living rooms of individual American investors. At its most extreme, Frank suggested, this ever-present ideology depended on a cybernetic understanding of information. By the end of the decade, he wrote, more than a few Americans agreed: “Life is in fact a computer. Everything we do can be understood as part of a giant calculating machine. . . . the ‘New Economy,’ the way of the microchip, is writ into the very DNA of existence.”17

The Whole Earth at Wired Frank and others understood the integration of computing, biology, and economics and its links to a rhetoric of political liberation as quintessentially 1990s phenomena. Yet, a close look at the history of Wired suggests that this rhetorical constellation emerged not simply alongside new communication technologies, nor exclusively among those who made and marketed those technologies, nor even in the 1990s. Rather, this particular version of what Kevin Kelly called the “computational metaphor” had been coming together for decades. Since the late 1960s, Stewart Brand and others associated with various Whole Earth publications had been linking information technologies to a New Communalist politics of personal and collective liberation. On the communes of the late 1960s, on the WELL of the 1980s, and even on Global Business Network retreats, information networks and social networks, biological systems and economic systems had seemed to mirror one another. It had all been “one,” so to speak, for some time. In the 1990s, however, the editors and writers of Wired transformed the long-standing Whole Earth synthesis of cybernetics and New Communalist social theory into a means of embracing figures such as Gilder and Gingrich. In the process, they legitimated calls for corporate deregulation, government downsizing, and a turn away from government and toward the flexible factory and the global marketplace as the principal sites of social change. And they did so using the collaborative editorial tactics, universal rhetoric, and interpersonal networks of the Whole Earth.

Editorially, Wired made no pretense of pursuing balance in either its point of view or its sources. At one level, Rossetto simply aimed to distinguish the magazine from its competitors. As he told a reporter for Upside magazine in 1997, “The mainstream media is not allowing us to understand what’s really happening today because it’s obsessed with telling you, ‘Well, on the one hand’ and ‘on the other hand’”; under conditions of digital revolution, Rossetto believed that a magazine could tell the truth—and achieve distinction— only by “not being objective.” At another level, though, Wired’s editorial practices grew out of its integration into the Whole Earth world. John Battelle, the magazine’s managing editor, had worked for two years at MacWeek and joined Wired after earning a master’s degree in journalism at the University of California, Berkeley. He later recalled the editorial process at Wired thus: “It was about networks, and everyone brought their own. I was on the WELL. Kevin was on the WELL. I was in the trade magazine world, so I brought that whole world over with me, all the writers, all the people, all the knowledge and all the players who I knew from that world. Kevin knew all the players from the Whole Earth world and the

WELL. And Louis brought in Europe and the global perspective, tying it all together.”18

Kevin Kelly agreed. When he was at Wired, he later said, he thought of himself as a “nonjournalist.” Kelly meant for Wired to be a forum for the various networks in which he circulated, as the Whole Earth Review had been. He thought of himself as “a convener of interesting ideas”—much like a conference host on the WELL.19 His job, he thought, was to stir up conversations and print them. For this reason, Kelly often allowed traditional professional boundaries to dissolve. As part of the editing process, for instance, he routinely allowed writers to share drafts of their stories with their sources. And when the magazine ran stories by and about members of the editors’ personal and professional networks, those relationships often went unacknowledged. For one example, although Peter Schwartz regularly contributed articles to Wired, and although the Global Business Network was the subject of a feature story, the fact that GBN had helped fund the magazine was never reported in its pages.

At the same time that they were working to break down the traditional journalistic wall between writers and their sources, the editors of Wired were using the WELL to break down barriers between the magazine and its audience and potential contributors. From the time Rossetto and Metcalfe established a Wired conference on the WELL, they used it to build interest in the magazine and a sense of ownership in it on the part of WELL regulars, and, ultimately, as a way to identify writers for the magazine. As the magazine’s paper issues hit the stands, the WELL hosted regular forums to discuss Wired articles, as well as forums for Wired contributors. Soon, Wired opened forums on other services, including Mindvox, Onenet, and AOL. The magazine also began distributing other articles online for free. In the early years particularly, contributors to these online forums often felt as though they part of the magazine.20 And many were. Almost immediately, some of the WELL’s most prominent members, including Stewart Brand, Howard Rheingold, and John Perry Barlow, began writing for Wired.

To Rossetto and Metcalfe this made sense, since they saw WELL users as living the sort of forward-thinking, technocentric lives their magazine celebrated. Rossetto was fond of comparing Wired to Rolling Stone. “Rolling stone held a window up to this group [of rock musicians] for the rest of the world to see how innovative, smart and powerful this group was,” Rossetto explained. At the same time, “it held a mirror up to the group itself.” Wired, he said, wanted to do the same with the citizens of the WELL and others like them. Rossetto’s claim in this regard masks a somewhat more complex process, though. In a 1992 business plan, Rossetto and Metcalfe had

described their target audience to potential investors as “Digital Visionaries.” With annual incomes averaging $75,000 a year, this group represented “The top ten percent of creators, managers, and professionals in the computer industries, business, design, entertainment, the media and education.”21 In the coming years, Wired reached this group with extraordinary success. Less than three years after the first issue appeared, for instance, when Wired was selling 300,000 copies a month, its readers were 87.9 percent male, 37 years old on average, with an average household income of more than $122,000 per year. In a reader survey, more than 90 percent of subscribers identified themselves as either “Professional/Managerial” or “Top Management.”22

Even though a number of WELL users certainly fell into this category, Wired was not, by and large, opening a window on the world of the WELL per se. Rather, its editors were using their links to the WELL and to a variety of other Whole Earth networks and organizations in order to conjure up and legitimate a particular social vision. In the pages of Wired, Whole Earth–affiliated organizations such as the WELL served as prototypes of a new and ideal form of networked sociability to which their readers might aspire. Over the course of its first five years, Wired ran lengthy features not only about the WELL, but also about the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Global Business Network, and the Media Lab. The stories often focused on individuals who were also regular contributors to Wired, such as John Perry Barlow in the case of the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Peter Schwartz in the case of the Global Business Network. In addition to legitimating Wired’s own writers, such stories presented the organizations as prototypes of the sort of life that digital technologies were ostensibly bringing about for society at large. That life, in turn, represented the fulfillment of a revolution begun in the 1960s.

In June 1994, for instance, Wired ran Joshua Quittner’s profile of the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), entitled “The Merry Pranksters Go to Washington.” The headline streamed across a full page, in one-and-aquarter-inch hot pink type; underneath it, a little dotted arrow directed the reader to turn the page. There, filling the next two pages, stood the eight principals of the EFF, including Mitch Kapor, John Perry Barlow, Stewart Brand, and Esther Dyson. Across the image ran a single line of text, drawn from the article: “The EFF does something that Mitch Kapor has wanted to do for three decades—‘find a way of preserving the ideology of the 1960s.’” Never mind that only one of the assembled group—Brand—had actually been a Prankster. To Quittner and his editors, the analogy was clear: “Older and wiser now, they’re on the road again, without the bus and the acid, but dispensing many similar-sounding bromides: Turn on, jack in, get

connected.” Quittner centered much of the article around Barlow and Kapor and several times quoted them as they suggested that their current work was an extension of the 1960s consciousness revolution, undertaken with grown-up sobriety. As Kapor put it, “John and I are refugees from the 1960s, trying to make it as adults in the 1990s, understanding that transforming consciousness takes some doing.”23

For the New Communalists, transforming consciousness had meant stepping outside party politics. To Kapor and Barlow in the 1990s, it meant heading to Washington. Quittner asserted that the EFF had developed an “Open Platform” proposal (essentially, a multipoint plan to facilitate interconnectivity across media) that had become a central element in Vice President Al Gore’s 1993 Information Superhighway plans. For the leaders of the EFF, Quittner implied, creating a highly interconnected digital network open to all was a way to create a countercultural ideal: the leveled, harmonious community, linked by invisible signals. In that sense, the EFF had taken up where the Whole Earth publications had left off. As Quittner put it, “The Whole Earth Catalog was a tool catalog. The EFF is about empowering people through the tool of networking.”24 In a long passage pulled out of the text and stretched across two pages, EFF board member Esther Dyson explained, “The fundamental thing (the Net does) is to overcome the advantages of economies of scale . . . so the big guys don’t rule.” On the Net, she argued, people could “organize ad hoc, rather than get stuck in some rigid group.” Quittner summed up her argument this way: “The Net, the very network itself, is merely a means to an end. The end is to reverse-engineer government, to hack Politics down to its component parts and fix it.”25

The urge to “hack” politics by bringing governance down to a manageable local level and by basing social integration on technologically facilitated forms of consciousness was one of the driving impulses behind the New Communalist movement. Now, however, the old hammer-and-sawwielding, do-it-yourself ethos of the back-to-the-landers had been fused to the craft ethic of computer programmers. Much as Stewart Brand and his Whole Earth colleagues had done at the Hacker’s Conference of 1984, Quittner and Dyson joined the cultural legitimacy of the counterculture to the technological and economic legitimacy of the computer industry. Married to a libertarian longing for the reduction of government, Dyson’s Internet became an idealized political sphere in the image of the forms of organization pursued by the Merry Pranksters, USCO, and many communes—forms in which authority was distributed, hierarchies were leveled, and citizens were linked by invisible energies. The Internet became both a metaphor for such a system and a means to bring it into being.

In Quittner’s article, the global Net also called to mind the local network of relationships in which the leaders of the EFF found themselves enmeshed. Quittner organized the piece around several miniature portraits of key EFF people. At each stage, he carefully emphasized their extraordinary mobility, their access to people in power, and their material success. In The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test, Tom Wolfe took readers inside the garage where the Merry Pranksters painted their psychedelic bus. Quittner here took readers inside San Francisco’s Bistro Rôti—“a cozily upscale place overlooking the bay . . . woodburning stove . . . valet parking . . . white Jaguar in front . . .”—for the EFF’s quarterly board meeting. Diners included Bill Joy, founder of Sun Microsystems; David Liddle, head of Interval Research Corporation; Wired’s own Jane Metcalfe; and a handful of other Silicon Valley luminaries alongside the current board members. Like the Merry Pranksters in Wolfe’s account, this new elite inspired a hush in onlookers: “Waiters and waitresses quietly remove the uneaten shrimp and satay and whisper to each diner: Chicken, steak or fish? Hot from the wood stove . . .” And like the Pranksters, the diners celebrated their historical importance. When Kapor introduced Barlow, Esther Dyson shouted, “Tell them how you travel, John!” Barlow replied, “Well . . . sometimes I travel by bicycle, sometimes by computer, and sometimes—like the day before yesterday—I travel by Air Force Two.”26 The other diners cheered, knowing that the vice president had invited Barlow on board to talk about Internet policy.

In the context of Quittner’s story, Barlow’s introduction represented a measure of the EFF’s power to influence contemporary politics and, at the same time, a vision of a future world in which social life, technological life, and political life had been completely intertwined. Barlow’s comments demonstrated that his material and immaterial networks overlapped. He traveled by computer and by Air Force Two, and his ability to do so modeled the mobility and flexibility of life in the leveled society that Esther Dyson argued digital networks were bringing about. Gathered in the warmth of the woodstove, the leaders of Silicon Valley and of the EFF also modeled the sort of informal politics said to take place on the Net. In fact, their obvious success and easygoing camaraderie seemed to mark the effects those politics could have on the rest of the world. Highly individual, smart, fun, they had come together in a room where, like master planners overlooking a map, they could view the landscape (or, in this case, seascape) far below. They were a new kind of elite, born out of the antihierarchical ethos of the 1960s and powerful in a manner that matched that ethos. And if readers simply went online, the article seemed to suggest, they too could share in that world.27

The prototypical elements of “The Merry Pranksters Go to Washington” reappeared in Wired’s profiles of the Global Business Network, the Media Lab, and the WELL. In November 1994, for instance, journalist Joel Garreau, himself a member of GBN, described the Global Business Network as “a cause, a club, a conspiracy, and a collection of highly energetic particles aimed at bumping up against huge organizations with positive results.” Seen from one angle, Garreau’s GBN was simply a group of interdisciplinary and interpersonal networks that specialized in the promotion of group learning. Seen from another, it was an information system, a collection of people who were themselves little packets of information colliding with one another and with “huge organizations.” Perhaps, Garreau implied, the Global Business Network would work like Esther Dyson’s Internet and would transform its client organizations into inventive, problem-solving ad-hocracies. His sources reinforced this notion, as did the article’s cybernetic tropes. GBN staffer Eric Best, for instance, described the organization thus: “It’s a convention of curious kids. They want the opportunity and license to explore anything with the smartest people they can find. At a time of macro change, it’s a collection of magpies and blue jays that set up the screeching when a big animal moves in the forest—because the forest needs that.”28 In Best’s view, GBN would play the role once assigned to the communes of the back-to-the-land movement. It would become an elite example of the sorts of organizations the world needed, a collection of magpies who might save the economic and social ecosystem in the face of rapid technological change.

These parallels between Whole Earth–related interpersonal networks, emerging digital networks, and “systems” more broadly construed, as well as the echoes of the cold war– era world-saving impulse of the New Communalists, also appeared in Katie Hafner’s 1997 portrait of the members of the WELL and in Fred Hapgood’s 1995 account of MIT’s Media Lab. After quoting leading WELL citizens describing the WELL as an “ecology” and as a “disembodied tribe,” Hafner slipped into nature metaphor herself.29 Conflicts, she wrote, “seemed a necessary force of nature, like a periodic brushfire that works its destruction to seed nutrients into the soil.” Online system, disembodied community, the WELL’s interpersonal networks—in Hafner’s account, each mirrored every other, and together they were a selfcontained system akin to the natural systems of the earth itself. Likewise, in a feature pinned to the Media Lab’s tenth anniversary, Fred Hapgood argued that the Lab’s “cultural variety gave it the outline of a complete society” and that “the relentless flood of projects made the place feel as if wherever it was going, it was getting there without losing a beat.”30 As Hapgood pointed out, the Media Lab had missed two of the most important developments in

computer networking, HTML code and Web browsers. Yet, he argued, like the WELL, the Global Business Network, and the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Media Lab was a prototype of an emerging world:

A decade after its inception, the lab serves as a model for the organization

of technical research and the relation of research to industry. It is also a model

for education, in which art and engineering are combined in a project-centered

curriculum where students’ work is reviewed by real-world experts instead of

academic professionals. No doubt this model has limitations, but we live at a

time when the old ideas on these issues are simultaneously rusting out.

Perhaps the single biggest achievement of the last 10 years will turn out to be

the Media Lab itself.31

The New Communalists Meet the New Right In each of these articles, the writer depicted a networked organization that seemed to be living out a contemporary version of the tribal countercultural ideal and appeared to forecast the social potential of the digital networking technologies of the 1990s in terms of that model. These groups served as prototypes not only of ways to coordinate research or online conversation, but of ways to organize a life. In addition, they helped to legitimate calls for telecommunications deregulation and smaller government. Wired served not only as a platform on which Whole Earth–related organizations could be displayed as prototypes, but also as a forum in which New Right pundits and politicians, proffering a highly libertarian version of the social impact of digital technologies, could be integrated into the Whole Earth’s story of world-saving countercultural revolution.

This role can be seen most clearly in Wired’s complex relationship with Esther Dyson, libertarian telecommunications analyst George Gilder, and House Speaker Newt Gingrich. Over the magazine’s first two years, these figures became involved in a cycle of mutual legitimation. At Wired, Gilder and Dyson served variously as sources, subjects, and authors of stories, and in August 1995 Dyson interviewed Gingrich for a Wired cover story. These appearances in Wired took place, however, against a background of other collaborations. In August 1994 Gilder invited Dyson to Aspen, Colorado, for a conference sponsored by the Progress and Freedom Foundation, a think tank closely linked to Newt Gingrich. There, along with Ronald Reagan’s former science adviser, George Keyworth, and Alvin Toffler, Gilder and Dyson lent their names to a document featuring what was arguably the decade’s most potent rhetorical welding of deregulationist politics to digital technologies, “Cyberspace and the American Dream: A Magna Carta for the

Knowledge Age.”32 A year later, while Gingrich’s portrait graced the cover of Wired, Dyson and Gilder returned to the Aspen conference, taking with them John Perry Barlow, Kevin Kelly, and Stewart Brand, as well as bionomist Michael Rothschild and representatives from Microsoft, America Online, and Sun Microsystems.

In keeping with the Whole Earth’s editorial tradition, Wired magazine simultaneously facilitated and celebrated these encounters. As members of the Whole Earth network, the computer industry, and the Republican right began to meet in person, they also began to appear in the magazine. In and of themselves, these appearances conferred legitimacy on members of each group. Wired also served as a site where representatives of each of these communities could lend members of other communities elements of their own public standing. The technical community could declare Gingrich to be a “wired” politician; the highly visible Gingrich could declare the technical community to be central to the national interest and on the cutting edge of politics. The countercultural community, represented in person by Brand, Barlow, and to some extent Kelly (and, in the pages of Wired, represented graphically by the magazine’s neo-’60s layout and design), worked to legitimate the rising forces of technology and New Right politics as signs of the coming of a countercultural revolution.

This process took place over several years and depended for its success on editorial tactics first developed in the Whole Earth publications. George Gilder’s relationship with Wired, for instance, began when Kevin Kelly interviewed him in the magazine’s fourth issue. At first glance, Kelly and Gilder would seem to be an odd match. During the same decades when Kelly was wandering Asia with his backpack, Gilder was establishing a reputation as a right-wing pundit. In 1973 he wrote an article for Harper’s magazine in which he declared that “the differences between the sexes are the single most important fact of human society” and that “the drive to deny them—in the name of women’s liberation, marital openness, sexual equality, erotic consumption, or homosexual romanticism—must be one of the most quixotic crusades in the history of the species.” In 1974 the National Organization for Women declared him the Male Chauvinist Pig of the Year for the book that grew out of that article, Sexual Suicide (later republished as Men and Marriage). In 1981, just a few years before Kelly came to work for Stewart Brand, Gilder published a defense of supply-side economics entitled Wealth and Poverty. Critics and supporters alike called the book “the bible of the Reagan revolution,” and it shortly reached number four on the New York Times best-seller list.33 Over the coming years, Gilder served up a volume of worshipful portraits of entrepreneurs (The Spirit of Enterprise, 1984), a celebration of technological miniaturization (Microcosm, 1989), and studies of

digital technologies as forces for the enhancement of individual liberty (Life after Television, 1990, and Telecosm, 2000). By the end of the 1990s, he would become famous as a promoter of telecommunications stocks, most notably Global Crossing—a company that went public in 1998 at nineteen dollars a share, saw its share price nearly triple within a year, and, only four years later, became the largest telecommunications company to go bankrupt in American history.

In the early 1990s, though, Gilder and Kelly were moving in the same high-tech circles. Both, for instance, had served as keynote speakers at the annual conferences on bionomics that Michael Rothschild had started in 1991. These conferences attracted executives from Silicon Valley as well as libertarians of various stripes (including John Perry Barlow, who spoke at one in 1992).34 As an intellectual framework, bionomics offered a natural meeting point for representatives of the New Right, such as Gilder, and of the Whole Earth’s cybernetic tradition, such as Kelly. For Kelly, the notion that natural and social systems could model one another had long made sense. For Gilder and others on the right, the notion that markets were “natural”—in the sense of inevitable and right—was virtually a mantra. For each, it was a small step to integrate computers into the analogy.

In his interview with Kelly, Gilder took this step with aplomb. “The Internet,” Gilder explained, “is an exciting kind of metaphor for spontaneous order.” That is, the Internet might model a biological or a social system, but wherever set, that system would be governed from within and would be well organized. According to Gilder, the Internet was also a trigger for a libertarian reorientation of government. As opposed to “top-down technologies” such as TV and telephones, digital technologies “put you in command again.” Government had no role to play in this process: “The government always discovers a technology after its moment is passing,” he intoned. “If you’re a winner you don’t go to the government.”35

By the middle of the interview, Gilder had begun to suggest that the Internet might be both a metaphor for a libertarian, free-market system and a sign of that system’s inevitability. Kelly then picked up Gilder’s thread and linked it explicitly to his own recently completed research on artificial life. Kelly suggested that the idea that the Internet would “eliminate hierarchy” might be a “myth, a utopian hope.” Experiments with computers had shown that what appeared to be peer-to-peer systems in fact depended on “nested hierarchies.” Gilder finessed the point: “The complexity of digital systems requires a hierarchical organization,” he explained. “You need nested hierarchies. . . . So hierarchies do indeed exist. But they are ubiquitously distributed, which renders them an egalitarian force.” In Gilder’s comments, the hierarchical elements of computers became evidence for

their antihierarchical social effects. And those effects could be mindboggling. Simply having access to a workstation granted a person “the power that an industrial tycoon commanded in the industrial era.”36

By the end of their conversation, Kelly and Gilder had come together around the computational metaphor and used it to link several previously distinct ideas and social positions. Digital networks, which depend on all sorts of logical and electronic hierarchies to function, had become the emblems of the theoretically “level playing field” of the ideal free market. At the same time, the “nested hierarchies” of the machines served as symbolic stand-ins for local tycoons. The material power of tycoons had been virtualized; in Gilder’s account, to control information was to control the world. This sort of statement could make sense only if one assumed, in keeping with the universal rhetoric of cybernetics and its social Darwinist cousin, bionomics, that the biological and social worlds were no more than information and that humans were, in the words of Norbert Wiener, not “stuff that abides but patterns which perpetuate themselves.” And it was a very short step from the notion that the control of information makes one an industrial tycoon to the notion that the tycoons of the information industries should naturally control other systems. In his interview with Kelly, Gilder had set up an array of rhetorical mirrors. Biological, economic, and digital systems reflected one another; each should ideally be decentralized, deregulated, and ruled by a series of information tycoons; each of the tycoons in turn should be the master of his own local, temporary, nested hierarchy.37

In Wired’s view, Gilder himself was both such a tycoon and something of a cultural revolutionary. In March 1996 Rossetto and Kelly put Gilder on the magazine’s cover. For the newsstand, the editors framed Gilder’s face in a cool neon dance-floor green; inside the magazine, they depicted him as a cyber-age Peter Pan, flying across a green sky, hair waving. Gilder was hip, young, and maybe a bit countercultural, even if he did wear a tie. He was also in touch with the machine. In his profile, Po Bronson compared the social and economic systems within which Gilder made his living as a consultant to the digital systems he studied. Much as other Wired writers had celebrated the members of the Electronic Frontier Foundation or the Global Business Network for their social connections, Bronson dwelled at length on Gilder’s hectic schedule of appearances, his migrations from tech company to tech company, and his twenty-thousand-dollar speaking fees. Gilder appeared to be a pattern of information, shuttling from node to node along a web of elite institutions. In case the reader missed the point, Bronson depicted Gilder literally speaking in the machine language of zeros and ones. When he met a new engineer, Bronson explained, Gilder and the engineer

would “go through this sort of cascade of language syntax, negotiating like two modems, trying to find the most efficient level of conversation they can hold.” In Bronson’s sample conversation, the engineer was named Steve:

george: Hi, nice to meet you. Hey, that’s a sweet access router over there.

Wow, both Ethernet and asynchronous ports?

steve: Yeah, check this baby out—the Ethernet port has AUI, BNC, and RJ-45

connectors.

george: So for packet filtering you went with TCP, UDP, and ICMP.

steve: Of course. To support dial-up SLIP and PPP.

george: Set user User_Name ifilter Filter _Name.

steve: Set filter s1.out 8 permit 192.9.200.2/32 0.0.0.0/0 tcp src eq 20.

*[symbol/figure content not captured in text extraction]*

george: Really? Wait, you lost me there.38

Read in the context of Kelly’s earlier interview and alongside Gilder’s own frequent contributions to the magazine in later issues, Bronson’s turning Gilder into a speaking computer represents a new level of legitimation for Gilder and his views. When Kelly interviewed Gilder, the conversation had revolved around the “computational metaphor” of cybernetics, and it linked that metaphor, and the Internet more generally, to a deregulated marketplace. Bronson’s profile placed Gilder himself inside the computational metaphor. By the end of the piece, it was hard to escape a cascade of conclusions: the Net modeled an ideal social, biological, political, and economic sphere; computers were the latest stage in the evolution of those spheres; computers also served as tools and analogies for a new and more highly evolved type of leader; George Gilder was one of those leaders. As in its profile of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Wired had offered the freelance lifestyle of a high-profile consultant as a model of the independent lifestyle ostensibly becoming available to the digital generation as a whole.

A month after Kelly’s first interview with Gilder appeared in Wired, Paulina Borsook published a similar profile of Dyson. The story moved swiftly through Dyson’s biography— child of physicist Freeman Dyson, childhood friend of Alice Bigelow (daughter of Julian Bigelow, John Von Neumann’s engineer), former Forbes reporter and Wall Street stock analyst, later editor of the newsletter Release 1.0 and hostess of the annual PC Forum conference. When it came to Dyson’s present career, however, the story slipped into information-system metaphors like those that appeared in Bronson’s profile of Gilder. Like Bronson’s Gilder, Borsook’s Dyson moved from company to company, “assimilating new ideas and retelling them to

those who can turn them into wealth.” She was a human node in an invisible network of information exchange. According to Borsook, she was somewhat singular and emotionally mechanical in her pursuits: “She often calls people ‘friendly’ or ‘nice,’” wrote Borsook, “meaning they have interesting ideas and are willing to share them.”39 Like a computer, Dyson was “constantly cross-referencing and time stamping” her encounters: “What Esther does, in short, is provide a salon bound neither by time nor by space. Most of its habitués will never meet, but they all know Esther.”40

Borsook’s notion of Dyson as a cross-referencing, time-stamping information system neatly blurred the distinctions between Dyson’s professional networks and the emerging digital networks of the Internet. Dyson appeared to be a computer; her invisible salon, a sort of cyberspace. In Borsook’s story, Dyson’s life as an entrepreneurial information worker and the emergence of digital networks became mutually legitimating mirrors of each other. Both were signs and products of the digital revolution under way. Borsook reminded her readers that this revolution was an extension of the countercultural revolution of thirty years before: “In spite of her libertarian leanings and her identification with the capitalist class, [Dyson] is in some ways the ultimate hippie. She has constructed a life that adheres to the ’60s credo ‘Follow your bliss and the money will come.’”41

By the time she appeared in Wired, Dyson had become well integrated into the extended Whole Earth network. She was one of the earliest members of the Global Business Network, joining in 1988. Brand, a long-time admirer, later recalled that “She brought to business a sharp analytical mind, no end of energy, intelligence and a somewhat libertarian political frame but an extreme public service inclination.” Through the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Dyson had remained in close contact with Brand, Barlow, Kelly, and others. In 1995 she would go on to become chairman of the board of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and in 1998 she would become chairman of ICANN, the international nonprofit corporation responsible for assigning domain names and addresses on the Internet. At the same time, however, Dyson was finding her way into the center of Republican power. In 1994 George Gilder arranged for Dyson to be invited to a conference in Atlanta entitled “Cyberspace and the American Dream,” sponsored by the Progress and Freedom Foundation (PFF). “I didn’t know much about the foundation,” Dyson later explained. “But they mentioned that, along with George, Alvin and Heidi Toffler would be there. That was good enough for me. Oh yes. And Representative Newt Gingrich, too.” In the summer of 1994, Dyson flew to Atlanta. At a small planning meeting for the conference, she met Gingrich for the first time. He impressed her with his poise, his knowledge of the Net, and most of all with the way in which he saw the

Net not so much as a way to make current government structures more efficient, but as an agent of political change in its own right. These views accorded well with her own, but the political terrain felt new and a little strange. “I walked into a world I didn’t understand,” she later recalled. “I discovered that the document I was to help draft was to be a manifesto.”42

The manifesto that Dyson went on to coauthor extended the cybernetic and countercultural analogies current in the social worlds of the Whole Earth and Wired, linked them to a libertarian political agenda, and ultimately used them as symbolic resources in support of the narrow goal of deregulating the telecommunications industry. The “Magna Carta for the Knowledge Age” represented the combined efforts of four authors: Esther Dyson, George Gilder, Alvin Toffler, and George Keyworth, who was Ronald Reagan’s former science adviser and a current PFF staffer. The document’s preamble opened with a grand flourish: “The central event of the 20th century is the overthrow of matter. . . . The powers of mind are everywhere ascendant over the brute force of things.” On the one hand, this triumph of the immaterial reflected Alvin Toffler’s claim that a “Third Wave” of socioeconomic change was sweeping the world. In the first wave, farming and manual labor dominated the economy; in the second, machines and mass production ruled the land. Now, the authors wrote, echoing Daniel Bell and other theorists of postindustrial society, “the central resource is actionable knowledge.”43 On the other hand, the preamble linked Toffler’s framework to the countercultural revolution of three decades before. After all, what had LSD users hoped to accomplish, if not the “overthrow of matter” by the “powers of mind”? This hope also reflected Norbert Wiener’s older, early cold war hope that somehow the powers of mind represented in computers could contain the “brute force” then represented by the massed armies of East and West.

As the manifesto progressed, so did the rhetorical commingling of these historical streams. Cyberspace, the authors explained, was “more ecosystem than machine”; it was “a bioelectronic environment that is literally universal.” Systems metaphors collided apace: like Gilder’s first interview at Wired, or like Kevin Kelly’s book Out of Control, the “Magna Carta” argued that computer systems and ecosystems modeled and interpenetrated one another. They also modeled the land of America itself: “The bioelectronic frontier is an appropriate metaphor for what is happening in cyberspace, calling to mind as it does the spirit of invention and discovery that led ancient mariners to explore the world, generations of pioneers to tame the American continent, and, more recently, to man’s first exploration of outer space. . . . Cyberspace is the land of knowledge, and the exploration of that land can be a civilization’s truest, highest calling. The opportunity is now

before us to empower every person to pursue that calling in his or her own way.” This invocation of the “frontier” mythos linked the cybernetic and countercultural rhetoric of the preamble to two constituencies: the lawmakers of Washington, D. C., and the back-to-the-landers of three decades earlier. In Washington, the metaphor of the frontier had long been used to justify political action—particularly the disposition of military force and the development of new technologies. In the wake of World War II, Vannevar Bush himself had justified the pursuit of science and technology as a quest to explore an “endless frontier.”44 In the 1960s, of course, many nowmiddle-aged lawmakers had grown up with John F. Kennedy’s celebration of the New Frontier. For former New Communalists, this frontier rhetoric suggested that the computer and telecommunications industries represented an extension of their own youthful efforts. Thirty years earlier, the commune-based subscribers to the Whole Earth Catalog had dressed up in the archaic cowboy hats and ankle-length dresses of the nineteenth century and headed out into the Southwest to build their encampments. Today, the “Magna Carta” suggested, echoing the postcountercultural rhetoric of Wired magazine, John Perry Barlow, and the Electronic Frontier Foundation, they need only boot up their computers and head out into cyberspace.

This frantic mingling of biological, digital, and frontier metaphors marked not only a collision of ideas, or even of historical thought-streams, but of communities of interest. Thrown together in Atlanta, the four authors of the “Magna Carta” had pooled the symbolic resources of the various communities they represented and created a contact language. Broadly speaking, this language served to facilitate collaboration across the groups it interconnected. Having agreed that computing was a “new frontier,” for instance, former hippies, young computer technologists, and government regulators could claim a common rhetorical ground on which to pursue their individual interests.

In the “Magna Carta,” though, this contact language quickly came to serve a much narrower agenda. As Richard Moore has pointed out, the “Magna Carta” argued that digital technologies would enhance individual liberty, only to then confuse individual freedom with corporate deregulation. Cyberspace belonged to “the people,” argued Dyson, Toffler, Gilder, and Keyworth, and as such, should be governed by them. Yet, thanks to the rhetorical confusion of cyberspace and the marketplace and, particularly, of cyberspace with the computing and telecommunications industries, the notion of returning cyberspace to its owners took on an entirely new connotation. “The most pressing need,” explained Dyson and her colleagues, “is to revamp the policies and programs that are slowing the creation of cyberspace. . . . Indeed, if there is to be an ‘industrial policy for the knowledge

age,’ it should focus on removing barriers to competition and massively deregulating the fast-growing telecommunications and computing industries.”45 What is more, it should allow “much greater collaboration between the cable industry and phone companies.” In a twist of logic reminiscent of George Gilder’s comments to Kevin Kelly on “nested hierarchies,” the document went on to argue that “obstructing such collaborations”—and, presumably, the near-monopolies that could result—“is socially elitist.”46 With a spectacular mix of hubris and hyperbole, the authors asserted that since digital technologies drove egalitarian empowerment, by definition, to restrain their technological development (and the empowerment of telecommunications and cable companies) would be to resist the forces of history, nature, technology, and American destiny all at once.

These arguments helped set the stage for the first major rewriting of American telecommunications policy in sixty years. By the end of 1994, Newt Gingrich and his insurgent Republicans had seized control of the Congress; almost immediately they launched a campaign to deregulate the telecommunications industry. With the Telecommunications Act of 1996, they succeeded. As the act was being developed, the “Magna Carta” helped make clear the House Speaker’s own position and offered a justifying logic for the deregulation of the largest players in the industry. Although the act would ultimately reach out in a number of ways to noncorporate stakeholders, retaining universal service provisions, for instance, and including provisions in support of small entrepreneurs, it also freed massive telecommunications firms and cable companies to expand their operations dramatically. Moreover, as Patricia Aufderheide has explained, it enshrined in law the notions that undergirded the “Magna Carta.” In the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as in the “Magna Carta,” technologies—particularly communication technologies and the Internet—were seen as models of open markets and an open political sphere and at the same time as tools with which to bring them about. In that sense, the act treated the interests of the marketplace and those of the public as if they were fundamentally synonymous.47

Though she may have felt somewhat awkward when she first entered Gingrich’s realm, Dyson returned for a second conference the following year. Entitled “Aspen Summit: Cyberspace and the American Dream II,” this meeting took place in Aspen, Colorado, and was again sponsored by the PFF. This time, the PFF extended invitations not only to Dyson, Toffler, and Keyworth, but also to John Perry Barlow, Stewart Brand, Kevin Kelly, and executives from Microsoft, America Online, and Sun Microsystems. Corporate sponsors of the event paid $25,000 to attend (other visitors paid $895), and many were unhappy. “If these people are opinion leaders, maybe I’m stuck in a Second Wave paradigm,” griped Christopher C. Quarles III,

manager for emerging markets at AT&T.48 Brand found himself on a panel reminding fellow spokesmen of the government’s central role in developing the digital technologies that they claimed the government should now step away from.49 If the “Aspen Summit” was intended to unite the technology industry, representatives of the San Francisco Bay area counterculture, and Republican Washington, it failed.

Nevertheless, though that meeting of the minds did not take hold in the mountains, it found a home in Wired. While the summiteers were meeting in Aspen, the August 1995 issue of Wired convened an interview between Esther Dyson and Newt Gingrich. In it they engaged in many of the rhetorical flourishes that characterized the “Magna Carta.” Together they depicted the Internet as a model of an ideally decentralized and in many ways degovernmentalized society, and as a tool with which to bring that society about. As Dyson and her coauthors had done in the “Magna Carta,” Gingrich compared the digital revolution to the birth of the American nation. In the interview, however, he extended that vision to include the social agenda of his own, then-insurgent party. Gingrich and the House Republicans had come to power carrying with them a multipoint program called the Contract with America. The Contract offered a blend of conservative social politics (welfare reform, anticrime legislation, promarriage tax policies) and laissez-faire business policy (corporate deregulation and tax reductions). In his interview with Dyson, Gingrich linked the Internet to both. “This is a society permeated by a belief that we have a mission, that our mission relates to God, and that our powers relate to God,” he declared.50 To settle the “bioelectronic frontier” he seemed to imply, was a divine mission, not unlike the settling of America some two hundred years earlier. And if that was true, then the Republicans themselves represented the vanguard of a new kind of society— one that would be more technologically savvy, but also more religious and more conservative. Toward the end of the interview, Gingrich hammered the point home by virtually restating the key points of the Republicans’ Contract with America:

We have to do nine things in parallel, which is complicated. We have to re-

new American civilization at a core-values level. We have to do everything

we think we are doing to compete in a world market so we’re economically

sufficient. We have to make the transition to the information age. We have to

replace welfare with a very different set of values and structures. We have to

decentralize power out of Washington and ideally out of government to some

extent. Everything we do at the federal level ought to be the best in the world,

or we shouldn’t be doing it. We need to balance the budget for fiscal long-term

reasons that are very real in terms of baby boomers’ retirement, in terms of

our kids’ lives. We need to reestablish physical safety against drugs, violent

crime, and foreign attacks. And finally we have to lead the planet. We’re the

only country capable of leading the human race. And we’ve got to do all nine

of those simultaneously. Life’s complicated.51

In her introduction to the interview, Esther Dyson expressed reservations about Gingrich’s social politics, explaining, “I like his ideals—but not necessarily the people who espouse them. Or the society that will result from them.”52 But by the end of her interview, the doubts seemed to have washed away. Dyson and Gingrich clearly spoke the same language—the language of the “Magna Carta.” Moreover, for regular readers of Wired, their encounter came at the end of a long series of articles in which the cybernetic, countercultural, and deregulationist strains of their rhetoric had already been legitimated. Their conversation and its rhetoric also reflected a series of earlier encounters between the Whole Earth community, the technological community, and the corporate community. By the time Dyson interviewed Gingrich, the notion of business as a source of social change, of digital technology as the tool and symbol of business, and of decentralization as a social ideal were well established in the pages of Wired and in its networks of contributors. So too was the idea that the digital revolution represented an extension of the countercultural revolution. From here, it took little imagination to guess that perhaps the Republican “revolution” of 1994 might itself be riding the same “Third Wave.”53

The Internet as the New Millennium In the end, Newt Gingrich’s appearance on the cover of Wired signaled the high-water mark of the alliance between the techno-libertarians of the computer industry, the former counterculturalists of the San Francisco Bay area, and the social conservatives of the New Right. As the failure of the second “Cyberspace and the American Dream” conference suggested, the apparent similarity between Newt Gingrich’s Republican agenda and Esther Dyson’s vision of post-Internet politics hinged as much on shared rhetoric as on shared material interests. In the late 1990s, though, as the stock market began its final ascent toward its end-of-the-decade peaks and as investors clamored for shares in Internet stocks, that rhetoric reappeared. In 1997 Wired published two articles that together linked the cybernetic thought styles and countercultural social ideals of the Whole Earth world to millenarian claims for the emergence of a New Economy. Both articles would be developed into books, and both would be among the most widely cited documents to argue that thanks to the Internet, the laws of twentieth-century economics,

not to mention the hierarchies of twentieth-century bureaucracy, had been left behind.

The first of these articles appeared in July 1997. The cover of Wired trumpeted the piece: the magazine’s designers centered a picture of the earth against a bright yellow background, echoing the covers of the Whole Earth Catalog. Over the green continents and blue oceans of the globe, they drew an early 1970s smiley face, chewing the sort of daisy long-haired protesters had famously slipped into the rifle barrels of soldiers at the 1967 March on the Pentagon. Even as its iconography pointed back toward the counterculture, the cover’s text suggested that a new revolution was afoot. “THE LONG BOOM,” it proclaimed, was under way: “We’re facing 25 years of prosperity, freedom, and a better environment for the world. You got a problem with that?”

The article itself claimed to be a “positive scenario” of the future.54 Written by Global Business Network president Peter Schwartz and GBN staffer Peter Leyden and entitled “The Long Boom: A History of the Future, 1980 –2020,” the article argued that two long-term historical streams had merged. The first was technological. The computer and telecommunications networks of the 1990s were only the beginning. Soon biotechnology and nanotechnology would come online and, in their wake, a form of technology much sought after on the communes of the 1960s: alternative energy. The second stream was social. A new “ethos of openness” had taken root, wrote Schwartz and Leyden, in America and abroad. Characterized by “the relentless process of globalization, the opening up of national economies and the integration of markets,” the new ethos spoke directly to the market populism of the late 1990s: in Schwartz and Leyden’s view, deregulation of international markets represented the opening up of international politics.55 Yet it also spoke to the dreams of those who had grown up in the 1960s. In their imaginary year 2000, they wrote, “Optimism abounds. Think back to that period following World War II. A booming economy buoyed a bold, optimistic view of the world: we can put a man on the Moon, we can build a Great Society, a racially integrated world. In our era we can expect the same.” That era would meld the technological achievements of the New Frontier to the social ambitions of the New Communalists. In the year 2000, the bureaucracies of the cold war era would be “flattened and networked through the widespread adoption of new technologies.”56 In their place would arise “a new civilization, a global civilization, distinct from those that arose on the planet before.” It would be a civilization marked by a singular understanding: “We’re one global society, one human race.”57

In Schwartz and Leyden’s article, and in the book that grew out of it, the Internet became a tool with which to fulfill both the cultural ambitions of

the New Communalists and the technological ambitions of the nation they sought to change. Like the space program of the 1960s, the Internet had revealed that the world was a single whole. And like the drugs of that era, it was linking the minds of individuals into a new, collaborative and geographically distributed civilization. Moreover, they wrote, the sudden rise of the Internet and the World Wide Web and, alongside them, the transformations in corporate life and the run-up in the stock market, were simply tastes of things to come.

Two months after “The Long Boom” appeared in Wired, Kevin Kelly amplified its conclusions and linked them to the social and intellectual networks he had brought together in his book Out of Control. In an article entitled “New Rules for the New Economy,” and in a book of the same name shortly thereafter, Kelly argued that digital networks and networked forms of economic activity would open a new era in human life. Like contemporary pundits such as George Gilder and John Hagel, a corporate consultant and author of the widely read Net Gain, Kelly argued that the rise of the Internet was driving a shift toward networked forms of economic and social life. But he went on to embed the shift in a cybernetic rhetoric and to claim that it was evidence for the imminent fulfillment of a New Communalist dream.

Almost fifty years earlier, Norbert Wiener’s vision of the world as an information system seeking homeostasis had offered cold war Americans a framework with which to imagine their own survival in a nuclear era. In Kevin Kelly’s work, however, that vision offered readers a glimpse of a new and more turbulent renewal:

Silicon chips linked into high-bandwidth channels are the neurons of our cul-

ture. Until this moment, our economy has been in the multicellular stage. Our

industrial age has required each customer or company to almost physically

touch one another. Our firms and organizations resemble blobs. Now, by the

enabling invention of silicon and glass neurons, a million new forms are pos-

sible. Boom! An infinite variety of new shapes and sizes of social organizations

are suddenly possible. Unimaginable forms of commerce can now coalesce in

this new economy. We are about to witness an explosion of entities built on

relationships and technology that will rival the early days of life on Earth in

their variety.58

Mind and computation, economy and nature, the corporation and the individual—for Kelly, all mirrored one another, linked by the universal rhetorical logic of cybernetics and by the New Communalist hope that new, nonhierarchical social forms might arise thanks to technologies of consciousness.

In the late 1990s, Kelly also saw these new forms as a business opportunity: “Those who obey the logic of the net, and who understand that we are entering into a realm with new rules, will have a keen advantage in the new economy.” By the end of the decade, millions of Americans were investing their savings in Internet companies, very much in the belief that the economy and perhaps even humanity as a whole had entered a new era. Young engineers were migrating to the hubs of digital innovation as fast as they could. In the industrial-era lofts south of Market Street in San Francisco and in the narrow corridors of Manhattan’s Silicon Alley, twenty-something marketers pulled their six-hundred-dollar Herman Miller chairs around hand-hewn oak and redwood tables and plotted something called “web strategy.” More than a few began to imagine themselves as bits of talent and information swirling in the currents of a knowledge economy, their own careers tied to their ability to divine its rapidly changing laws.59 Corporations reconfigured offices to facilitate flexible work, programmers camped in their companies’ open-all-night offices, and day after day, financiers, technologists, and ordinary Americans checked the financial pages for signs that the future was still dawning.

However, even as optimism peaked in its pages and among its readership, Wired magazine began to stumble. Since 1993 Wired’s investors had put up a total of $40 million. As of January 31, 1997, Wired and its associated ventures had lost some $50 million— despite taking in as much as $17 million in advertising in 1996 alone.60 In part, these losses reflected Louis Rossetto’s extraordinary ambition. No sooner had the magazine begun to appear on newsstands than Rossetto and his team began to expand into online ventures, book publishing, television production, and multilingual overseas editions of the magazine.61 That ambition in turn led Rossetto and his team to try to capitalize on the magazine’s reputation. In May of 1996, they did what so many Internet start-ups were doing: they hired Goldman Sachs to take them public. Most magazine and publishing companies typically sell at three times their book value. At this rate, Wired should probably have sold for between $6 million and $10 million.62 Goldman Sachs floated an initial public offering that valued Wired Ventures at $447 million. Had it been accepted, Louis Rossetto alone would have pocketed $70 million. When they could not find enough takers at that price, Goldman Sachs withdrew the IPO. In September of 1996, they tried again. This time they valued the firm at $293 million. Even at this revised rate, Wired would have been valued more highly than 92 percent of the five thousand largest publicly traded companies in America at the time.63

Perhaps Goldman Sachs had been hoping that investors would mistake Wired magazine for the technological “revolution” it covered. After all,

Wired’s editors had long conflated the success of their interpersonal networks with the power of emerging networking technologies. If so, they were out of luck. Goldman Sachs found itself forced to cancel the second IPO as well, for lack of interest. Wired continued to lose money, and in July 1997, just as Wired’s cover heralded the arrival of the Long Boom, Wired’s investors forced Louis Rossetto to step down as chief executive officer of Wired Ventures. Five months later, he left the staff of the magazine altogether; soon thereafter, Kevin Kelly followed suit.

Not long after this, the stock market’s dot-com bubble began to leak and then suddenly burst. Wired’s techno-libertarian optimism would live on, as would the magazine itself. But for most Americans, the “Long Boom” was over.
