---
book: "The Transparency Society"
author: "Byung-Chul Han"
translator: "Erik Butler"
part: "The Society of Control"
source_pages: "45–49"
type: source
---

# 9. The Society of Control

We are experiencing the end of “the perspectival truth of the panoptic system,” Baudrillard remarked in 1978.1 In presenting his argument, he referred to the medium of television:

> The eye of TV is no longer the source of an absolute gaze, and the ideal of control is no longer that of transparency. This still presupposes an objective space (that of the Renaissance) and the omnipotence of the despotic gaze.2

When he wrote these words, Baudrillard could not know about digital networking, of course. Today, contra this diagnosis, we must observe: at the moment, we are not experiencing the end of the panopticon, but rather the beginning of an entirely new, aperspectival panopticon. The digital panopticon of the twenty-first century is aperspectival insofar as it no longer conducts surveillance from a central point, with the omnipotence of the despotic gaze. The distinction between center and periphery, which is fundamental to the Benthamian panopticon, has disappeared entirely. The digital panopticon functions without any perspectival optics. That is what makes it efficient. Aperspectival, penetrating illumination [Durchleuchtung] proves more effective than perspectival surveillance because it means utter illumination of everyone from everywhere, which anyone can perform.

Bentham’s panopticon is a phenomenon of disciplinary society; it was supposed to afford improvement. Prisons, factories, madhouses, hospitals, and schools were subjected to panoptic control. These are the typical institutions of disciplinary society. The cells arranged in a circle around the control tower are strictly separated from one another, and so the occupants cannot communicate. The separating walls assure that they also cannot see each other. For the purpose of improvement, one reads in Bentham, they are exposed to isolation. The gaze of the supervisor reaches every corner of the cell, whereas he himself remains invisible to occupants: “The essence of it consists, then, in the centrality of the inspector’s situation, combined with the well-known and most effectual contrivances for seeing without being seen.”3 With the help of technological cunning, the illusion of permanent surveillance is achieved. Therein lies its perspectivism, which founds the structure of power and domination. While occupants of the Benthamian panopticon are aware of the supervisor’s constant presence, the inhabitants of the digital panopticon think that they are free.

Today’s society of control possesses a distinct panoptic structure. In contrast to the occupants of the Benthamian panopticon, who are isolated from each other, the inhabitants of today’s panopticon network and communicate with each other intensively. Not lonesomeness through isolation, but hypercommunication guarantees transparency. Above all, the particularity of the digital panopticon is that its inhabitants actively collaborate in its construction and maintenance by putting themselves on display and baring themselves. They display themselves on the panoptic market. Pornographic putting-on-display and panoptic control complement each other. Exhibitionism and voyeurism feed the net as a digital panopticon. The society of control achieves perfection when subjects bare themselves not through outer constraint but through self-generated need, that is, when the fear of having to abandon one’s private and intimate sphere yields to the need to put oneself on display without shame.

In light of the unremitting progress of surveillance technology, the futurologist David Brin has rushed to the fore and called for the surveillance of all by all—that is, for the democratization of surveillance. This holds the promise of a “transparent society.” He duly announces a categorical imperative: “Can we stand living exposed to scrutiny, our secrets laid open, if in return we get flashlights of our own that we can shine on anyone?”4 Brin’s utopia of a “transparent society” rests on unlimited surveillance. Asymmetrical flows of information producing power relations and domination are supposed to be eliminated. What Brin is calling for, then, is complete mutual illumination. “Below” is not just watched over by “above”; “above” is also watched over by “below.” Everyone should hand everyone else over to visibility and control; this would hold for the private sphere, too. Such total surveillance degrades “transparent society” into an inhuman society of control: everyone controls everyone.

Transparency and power do not get along well. Power likes to cloak itself in secrecy. The praxis of arcana is one technique that power employs. Transparency dismantles the arcane sphere of power. Yet mutual transparency can only be achieved through permanent surveillance, which always takes on increasingly excessive forms. Such is the logic of surveillance society. Total control destroys the freedom of action and ultimately leads to Gleichschaltung. It is not possible simply to replace trust, which makes way for free spheres of action, with control: “The people have to believe in and trust their ruler; when they trust, they grant him a measure of freedom to act without constant auditing, monitoring, and oversight. Lacking that autonomy, he could indeed never make a move.”5

Trust is only possible in a state between knowing and not knowing. Trust means establishing a positive relationship with the Other, even in ignorance. It makes actions possible despite one’s lack of knowledge. If I know everything in advance, there is no need for trust. Transparency is a state in which all not-knowing is

eliminated. Where transparency prevails, no room for trust exists. Instead of affirming that “transparency creates trust,” one should instead say, “transparency dismantles trust.” The demand for transparency grows loud precisely when trust no longer prevails. In a society based on trust, no intrusive demand for transparency would surface. The society of transparency is a society of mistrust and suspicion; it relies on control because of vanishing confidence. Strident calls for transparency point to the simple fact that the moral foundation of society has grown faulty, that moral values such as honesty and uprightness are losing their meaning more and more. As the new social imperative, transparency is taking the place of a moral instance that would break new ground.

The society of transparency obeys the logic of the society of achievement [Leistungsgesellschaft] entirely. The achievement-subject [Leistungssubjekt] operates independently of external domination forcing it to work and exploiting it. One is the master and entrepreneur of oneself. However, the disappearance of the instance of domination does not lead to real freedom or the absence of constraint, for the achievement-subject exploits itself. The exploiter is simultaneously the exploited. Perpetrator and victim collapse into one. Auto-exploitation proves more efficient than allo-exploitation because a feeling of freedom attends it. The achievement-subject subjects itself to freely willed, self-generated constraint. This dialectic of freedom also underlies the society of control. Utter auto illumination functions more efficiently than utter allo-illumination because it is attended by the sensation of freedom.

Above all, the project of the panopticon had a moral—or biopolitical—motivation. According to Bentham, the first result to be expected of panoptic control is seeing “morals reformed.”6 Further effects include “health preserved” and “instruction diffused”; “the Gordian knot of the Poor-Laws are not cut, but untied.”7 But today’s compulsive transparency no longer has an explicitly moral or biopolitical imperative; above all, it follows an economic imperative. People who illuminate themselves entirely

surrender to exploitation. Illumination is exploitation. Overexposing individual subjects maximizes economic efficiency. The transparent customer is the new prisoner—indeed, the homo sacer—of the digital panopticon.

No community, in the strong sense, can form in the society of transparency. Instead, chance gatherings [Ansammlungen] or crowds [Vielheiten] of isolated individuals, or egos, emerge; they pursue a mutual interest or cluster around a product line (“brand communities”). These groups are different from assemblies, which might yet prove capable of mutual political action, of constituting a “we.” They lack spirit.8 Gatherings such as brand communities constitute an additive formation without any inner density. Consumers voluntarily give themselves over to panoptic surveillance that steers and satisfies their needs. On this score, social media prove no different from panoptic machines. Communication and commerce, freedom and control, collapse into one. Opening up relations of production to consumers suggests reciprocal transparency; however, it ultimately turns out to be the exploitation of the social. The social degrades into a functional element within the process of production and undergoes operationalization. It chiefly serves to optimize relations of production. The illusory freedom of consumers lacks all negativity. They no longer constitute an outside that might question the systemic inside.

Today the entire globe is developing into a panopticon. There is no outside space. The panopticon is becoming total. No wall separates inside from outside. Google and social networks, which present themselves as spaces of freedom, are assuming panoptic forms. Today surveillance is not occurring as an attack on freedom,9 as is normally assumed. Instead, people are voluntarily surrendering to the panoptic gaze. They deliberately collaborate in the digital panopticon by denuding and exhibiting themselves. The prisoner in the digital panopticon is a perpetrator and a victim at the same time. Herein lies the dialectic of freedom. Freedom turns out to be a form of control.
