---
book: "Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology, and Consciousness"
author: "Roy Ascott"
editor: "Edward A. Shanken"
part: "Telenoia"
year: "1993"
source_pages: "258–275"
type: source
---

# Telenoia

*1993*

I would like to start by confronting two questions that are often

put to me concerning art in the telematic culture: “Can computer communications technology sustain art?” and “Will telematic systems destroy the humanness of human communication?” Well, first,

what do we mean by “telematics”?

Telematics, being the fusion of computers and telecommunications systems, is both a technology and a medium. As a medium, it

is at the heart of interactivity, of diffusion with reciprocity, of telepresence and informatic negotiation. As a technology, it is concerned with sustaining systems and processes of all kinds, artistic

and cultural just as much as biological, commercial, or industrial.

Telematics can certainly sustain art, and as I hope to show you, can

extend it into unprecedented forms. But whether art, in the sense

in which we have chosen to define it over the past hundred or so

years (I’m thinking of romanticism and modernism, of course), is

capable of sustaining itself into the twenty-first century, with or without technology, is quite another matter.

My feeling is that it probably is not capable of doing so, and that

we can well do without it. By that I mean that we can do without

an art that reinforces ideologies of repression and conservation

rather than bringing into the world new metaphors to enhance life.

It’s a bit like the institutionalisation of religion: as its power and

relevance decline, we can see that, historically on balance, probably more bad than good has been done in its name. There’s much

rhetoric about wholeness and transcendence, but the overarching

effect has been to strengthen alienation, sectarianism, and strife.

Much romantic and modernist art often celebrated, as much as it

*Originally published in On Line–Kunst im Netz, edited by Robert Adrian (Graz: Stei-*

rischen Kulturinitiative, 1993), and reprinted by permission of Richard Kriesche and

Kulturdata. epitomised, the alienation of experience and the solipsism of consciousness to which we were doomed in the industrial age. The secrecy and suspicion sustained by the paradigm of paranoia, which is what the smokestack culture engendered, was well reflected in a lust for power in the citadels of culture and scholarship (and too often the two were thought to be synonymous), by the advancement of hermeneutics and the control of representation. The control, that is, of meaning.

Well, we want to put all that behind us. We played along as artists in that era unknowingly, unconsciously, because we never took the trouble to examine critically just what it was, just what kind of cultural war machine we were feeding. Who would imagine in the heady years of the 1960s in New York or London that the private gallery was a Sherman tank, that Artforum fired missiles, that the Museum of Modern Art was a military installation? We should have known, since our language was full of avant-gardisms. We failed to see the structural connection between the supreme individualism of art and the supreme individualism of business and speculation. Nor did we recognise how our notion of artistic leader mapped so precisely onto the notion of captain of industry, or how the great artistic indifference to the world beyond the ego mirrored the entrepreneur’s indifference to the world beyond the stock exchange.

Let’s look at the assumption that seems to lie behind the second question, “Will telematic systems destroy the humanness of human communication?” This begs the further question, “Communication between whom and about what?” Do we mean the top-down communication of the political state, the one-way communication of institutionalised teaching and learning, the circulation of information within universes of discourse that prided themselves on their total separateness and isolation from one another? All these qualities seem to me properly to describe social communication in the pre-telematic era. After all, language, so-called “natural language,” is technology— a tool for shaping perception, limiting and defining worldviews by its structures, its registers and tropes, every bit as much as the metaphors it licenses. Those who control language, which is to say representation, control our consciousness, even as we recognise that they control our actions.

What is so breathtakingly lovely about a networked world, the telematic culture, is that it is beyond representation, or rather that, in the congregation of representations that it sustains, an ebb and flow of meanings, semantic transformations, uncertainties, and ambiguities are made possible. In the world as net, we can play with meaning, “play in deep seriousness” (as Thomas Mann defined art), which empowers us to de-authorise meaning just as it enables us to reconstruct the world. The reconstruction is a model, to be sure, creating a virtual world, from which other worlds can emerge. The potency of virtual reality technology can thus be understood in its power to transform the world, just as it can be seen to open up the inevitable pathway to our co-evolutionary development of artificial life.

In November of 1992, I coined a word that was intended both to identify a specific networking project and to stand for the nature of the telematic process in general. The project was initiated at the V2 Organisation in s’Hertogenbosch in Holland. It was an intensive twenty-four-hour, global event involving bulletin boards, e-mail, computer conferencing, file exchange, fax, and videophone. And, although it generated a massive amount of data (images, texts, music), was highly interactive, and involved many artists dispersed throughout Europe and America, it is not possible properly to mediate the experience of the event on videotape, in slides or by text, although such documentation has been made. This is so, essentially, for all telematic projects, since the processes of interaction can only be felt and understood from inside the network. Unlike a painting, sculpture, or other artifact of the pre-telematic culture, whose surface is absolutely intended to be viewed, whose very purpose is to externalise meaning, a work of telematic art generates meaning through our intimate participation in its evolution. It cannot be viewed, from the outside, as a discrete entity.

The word I coined to describe both the means and the meaning of this process is “telenoia,” from the Greek roots tele, “far off,” and nous, “mind.” Telenoia is networked consciousness, interactive awareness, mind at large (to use Gregory Bateson’s term). And although it’s a new word, I think you might agree that its meaning has a very old provenance, in that it perhaps should have been the very first word to be uttered as we emerged into our humanness, as we evolved our distinctiveness amongst the primates, signalled by the emergence of shared consciousness, from which I suppose our sense of society and social responsibility grew. But if, in the beginning, the Word was Telenoia; it is evident now that we lost it, perhaps in inverse ratio to our gain in verbal intelligence, or at any rate in the cultural prioritisation of linear, mechanical thinking, which was especially accelerated during our recent history of deterministic industrialisation. Certainly, we abandoned right hemisphere thinking —visual, mosaic, all-at-oncethinking —long ago. The left hemisphere of our brain (controlling the right side of our body, and instrumental in the “right” kind of social acts) had acquired dominance over the right hemisphere, just as patriarchy replaced matriarchy. The stately progression of logic, step by step, has won for it an authoritative

Figure 36. Telenoia. 1992. Announcement for telematic art project,

V2, ’s-Hertogenbosch, Holland. Courtesy V2 archive. gravity, which discredits the dazzling speed of intuition. The non-linear, intuitional, fast-as-lightning distributed mind of networks, whether on the vast scale of the whole planet or as infinitely small as your average, down-home neural network are equally distrusted by institutionalised authority.

Telenoia is what we invoke as artists involved in networking, it is what cultural telematics is all about. The implications of digital networking —for culture, for the social order, indeed, for many of our established behaviours— are quite radical. Networking is a subversive activity of extreme potency. It is turning the world upside down, inside out. It is actually erasing space, destabilising location, and investing time with qualities of reversal and compression with a relational order much closer to that of aboriginal cultures than to the strict linearity of the old modernism.

We are creating a culture in which the “artist” becomes a complex and widely distributed system, in which both human and artificial cognition and perception play their part; an art that is emergent from a multiplicity of interactions in data space. It is from telematics in art that we have the concept of “distributed authorship.” I coined this term in 1983 to describe the process of creativity involved in my project for Frank Popper’s exhibition “Electra” at the Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.

The title of the project, “La Plissure du Texte: A Planetary Fairy Tale,” alludes to Roland Barthes’s book Le Plaisir du Texte, a famous discourse on authorship, semantic layering, and the creative role of the reader as writer of the text. But in my title for the project, plissure (pleating) is not intended to replace plaisir (pleasure), only to amplify and enhance it. The project used the I. P. Sharp timesharing global computer communications network to create a virtual community of co-authors, interacting in data space to write a planetary fairy tale. There were fourteen principal nodes, spread across four continents, each node in turn linked to a local regional network of groups and individuals. Each node represented a character, an archetype from the repertory of characters in fairy tales: Honolulu was the “Wise Old Man,” Pittsburgh “the Prince,” Amsterdam “the Villain,” San Francisco “the Fool,” Toronto “the Fairy,” Vancouver “the Princess,” Vienna “the Sorcerer’s Apprentice,” Alma, Quebec, “the Beast,” Sydney, Australia, “the Witch,” and Bristol “the Trickster,” while I, with the role of “the Magician,” set the whole thing in motion from Musée d’Art Moderne in Paris. The story developed as each node inputted text into the net, which was then stored in I. P. Sharp’s central computer in Toronto until other nodes came online, outputted the developing story and added further twists and turns to the tale. Needless to say, the emerging texts were multilayered, insightful, witty, wise, and inventive in turn. The story was non-linear, indeterminate, branching, and unforeseeable at every point. The process continued night and day for three weeks. It existed in the data space until retrieved, transformed, reprocessed, and restructured by a node coming online. Most nodes offered access to the network to the public, who were encouraged to participate in the writing of the fairy tale.

During this period in Paris, I experimented with another “Plissure du Texte” within an interactive system of a more public kind, this time, however, pleating the texts of two authors from two quite different spheres within the (then) newly developed interactive system known as Minitel, the public access videotext system that has since become so hugely popular and pervasive in French communications culture. The texts were randomly selected from Henri Bué’s translation into French of Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland and Organe et fonction, a scientific treatise by two theoretical biologists in Montreal. The piece, “Organe et Fonction d’Alice aux Pays des Merveilles,” was part of Jean-François Lyotard’s 1984 postmodern exhibition at Beaubourg, “Les Immatériaux,” which existed not in the building as such, but throughout the data space of the Minitel network, allowing for participation at home by the public wishing to play with the piece’s “meaning.”

In all telecommunication projects, whether involving computer conferencing networks, interactive videotext like Minitel, bulletin boards, or e-mail systems, each individual interface is an aspect of a telematic unity, such that to be at any one interface is to be in the virtual presence of all other interfaces throughout the network to which it is online. This might be defined as the “holomatic” principle. This principle was well demonstrated during the Venice Biennale of 1986, when the “Planetary Network” (which I initiated as an international commissioner of the Biennale) had the effect, through its worldwide network of artists, of stretching the location of the Biennale from its traditional base in Venice to extend over the whole face of the globe. As with “La Plissure du Texte,” the flow of information generated, transmitted, manipulated, distorted, transformed, and reciprocated was rich in poetry, visions, stern political realities, beauty, fantasy, and facts. In this faster-than-light, stratospheric atmosphere, a group of well-grounded Aussies were always there in the network ready to bring us back to earth. But whatever the content in all its diversity, the data flow at any one point was the data flow at all other points in the system, and as it changed, through online interaction at any one point, so it changed at all other locations.

The same was the case with a multimedia interactive project I initiated for the Ars Electronica Festival in Linz, Austria, in 1989, “Gaia: Digital Pathways across the Whole Earth,” which was addressed to “artists, scientists, poets, shamans, musicians, architects, visionaries, aboriginal artists of Australia, native artists of the Americas” [see also chapter 16 above—Ed.]. It involved over a hundred artists, from all parts of the planet, sending and receiving images, texts, and music files by computer communications and fax. The interface at Linz was on two levels. The upper part presented data horizontally displayed on interactive screens; the lower part, Gaia’s womb, constituted a dark “data tunnel” through which the spectator rode (on an electronically driven flatbed trolley), passing a series of LED signs displaying incoming messages networked from all parts of the world.

But these were earlier works. Now that the technology of computer-mediated communications, telepresence, and multilayered, multimedia interactivity is more advanced, the stakes are higher, and, equally, the objectives are becoming clearer to me. Gaia has become Caiia for me, the big C calling for our participation as artists in the connectivity and computerisation of Gaia.

CAiiA stands for the Centre for Advanced Inquiry in the Interactive Arts, which is the base, set in the Newport School of Art and Design at Gwent College of Higher Education in Wales [now known as the University of Wales College, Newport—Ed.], from which we are planning to develop a community of artists and scientists dedicated to explore this expanding field of art: a network community, living and working online, in virtual space, in the data field. I describe this base as a “data garden,” since it must grow to embrace both hard and soft, smart and neural, engineered and biological developments in the art of the twenty-first century. Of course, similar initiatives are appearing in other parts of Europe, as well as in North America and Japan. One node of the evolving world net is incorporated in quite dramatic structures at Futuroscope in Poitiers, France.

The network creativity emerging from these worldwide initiatives is not only ignoring the boundaries of geography and region, and of culture and gender, but contributes, along with new scientific and philosophical insights, to the erasure of the established boundaries of the material body—established, that is, within a Cartesian, medical orthodoxy specific to Western cultures. The concept of the body in many Eastern cultures is quite other.

This erasure leads, however, not to a disembodiment of the person, nor to an immateriality, but to the rematerialisation, the redescription, reconstruction— in short, the reinvention of the human being. But it is a human being made ready to fly, outward bound for the stars, rather than to be eternally earthbound. Our perspectives are beginning to shift away from the earth, out into the cosmos. Our eyes are set on the stars. We see Gaia now more as a friend than as a mother, more as a space platform than as a host body.

Herein lies the cultural transformation that we feel so keenly and in so many ways. It may account for our profound neglect of the earthbound condition, our propensity for nomadism, our apparently callous indifference to homelessness, to the disintegration of society. While we are certainly open to moral censure in all these respects, we cannot be satisfied with the simplistic proposition that selfishness and greed are totally responsible. We have always been selfish and greedy, but in past eras, we have loved dearly, even excessively, the earth and the human condition, as represented in its body; think only of the history of art: canvas upon canvas of landscapes, of nature, of the earth, and in sculpture, pedestal upon pedestal of human figures. While obscene greed and selfishness are still with us, I sense now a quality of indifference born of longing. The longing to escape the earth, to escape the body, to reframe ourselves, to recontextualize our lives. This longing has brought us not simply to a point of cultural transition but to an enormous rupture from the past, indeed from history itself. The same longing brought forth the very technologies that have provoked this rupture. Telematic technology is the technology of consciousness; it is spiritual before it is in any way utilitarian.

This rupture with the past, this erasure of the old models of mind, body, and world is marked by three cardinal factors: . the growing together of minds, witnessed in the exponential growth of the technology of communications, that is, of telematic connectivity; . the fragmentation and dispersal of the body, witnessed in the technologies of presence, that is, of telepresence; . and the extension of the environment, witnessed in the ascendancy of artificial life and the technology of space exploration. Fundamental to this whole cultural transition is the displacement of the body. In one sense, we were never as aware of the body as we are now. It is glorious, we celebrate it, we nurture it, exercise it, cosset it. Our technological prostheses extend it, amplify it, enrich it. We know its innermost workings, its cycles and seasons, its changes, its autonomous systems and ecological dependencies. The body has been rediscovered, re-evaluated, brought into its own. We love it with the intensity we show to those we must leave behind, forever. The body frames the mind; our mind is now embarked on a project to reframe itself, to reconfigure its housing, to remodel and relocate. Thus we are moving not so much out-of-body as out-of-frame, recontextualising ourselves on the cosmic plane rather than the earthly plane. We can’t wait to go, we need lift-off, and we need it now! This is currently most dramatically felt both in the fantasy worlds of drug culture (which may also contain a shamanic reality) and in our real experience of telepresence, in our ability to view, hear, and generally sense the world remotely, to communicate with each other in electronic, immaterial, virtual spaces, to be distributed across remote and extended locations, to be both here and there, in many places at one and the same time.

The individual human presence of the individual human self, a unitary and undivided personality, has become the multiple, distributed presences of a set of many selves, of multileveled, complex, diverse personalities—l’homme éclaté, as Paul Virilio has called it. The explosion of the one and the connectivity of the many is perhaps the single most important effect of the telematisation of our culture. It could be argued that the appearance of the zero in Western thought has been equalled in importance only by the disappearance of the one, the single and solitary, whose boundary and isolation was hermetically complete. Our impulse is that of connectivity. Connectivity is a significant feature of the evolutionary process. The undivided unity we seek is in mind at large. The complexity of personality we generate demands more than one single body or a solitary, permanent presence could support. Psychology is unprepared to deal with the exigencies of telepresence in a telematic society. In this respect, the computer scientist Hans Moravec has more to offer us than Freud; his vision of a consummate downloading of personality from wetware to hardware offers us more promise of liberating ourselves from history and the chains of trauma than Freud’s closet consciousness could ever hope to do.

And we can no longer accept death: we transfer our allegiance from an art that seeks immortality through the residue of the artwork-as-object to an art that joins forces with the poets and visionaries of advanced robotics, artificial life, nanotechnology, and born-again bionics. For let us be clear, human presence is now a technological matter, just as human evolution is in step with the evolution of nanosystems and bio-engineering. To be in the telepresence of another, of others who in turn feel your own telepresence close to themselves, is to define community in a quite radically different way. Love in the telematic embrace is a many-splendoured thing, or in the light of the multimedia involved, a multisplendoured thing! And I haven’t begun to discuss, yet, the scope of cyberspace; that is of interactivity in virtual reality. Cybersex and virtual affection are qualities of human relationship we are only beginning to define.

Telenoia is thus set to replace the paranoia of the isolated, alienated self of the old industrial society. The cult of the individual was always accompanied by the cult of the unified, indivisible human being, one body, one soul, one self. Since the divided self was a threat to the established order, P. D. Ouspensky’s claim that we are each composed of many selves [see, e.g., Ouspensky (1950) 1974] has been taken to be a sign of outright lunacy, and schizophrenia is viewed as the sign of the utmost otherness.

The technologies of presence are preparing us for connectivity with artificial life, the creation of a cyborg culture. If we are leaving the old, classical, earthly body for another, it is not in order to dematerialise but to inhabit a new corporeality, which is almost totally artificial, bionic, prosthetic. Just as the artist is concerned no longer with the creation of content but with the construction of a context (the goal is a hypercontext), so, too, the brain seeks its hypercontext in the hyperbody. This is to talk about the post-biological body as interface. Where the user of the body has volitional control over various electronic devices directly from nervous system signals, creating what Hugh Lusted, Benjamin Knapp, and Anthony Lloyd call “biocontrollers,” a technology providing direct information channels between the human and computer (from muscle, eye, and brain signals). And it is the interface to networks, to systems of connectivity and interactivity, that is our primary concern. Interface is all context, just as content is all interactivity between the viewer and the interface-as-art. It is in this sense that I say that the artist is a system by which, and in interaction with which, meaning is generated. The degree to which the system is “human” is of very little significance. The human value of the meaning generated resides in the intervention of the (human) viewer or user of the system.

Let me then, if rather simplistically, review the principal factors contributing to the cultural rupture in which we are so profoundly implicated: . Electronic, computer-mediated, and post-biological systems are now a fundamental part of our daily life and are playing a significant role in the transformation and globalisation of culture. . Artists working with these systems are seeking the means to increase our cognitive and sensory immersion in the data spaces and data structures they create. . Interactivity is a quality more and more sought by the public in all aspects of production, transportation, entertainment, education, planning, and architecture, as well as art. . Interactivity empowers the individual to participate fully in the workings of a system, whether that system operates at the conceptual, behavioural, or environmental level, and whether it is utilitarian or artistic. . The public is becoming increasingly aware of the value of electronic space as a space for personal transformation, for communication, play, learning, and gaining information. . Older cultural institutions cannot adapt to the needs of the new postbiological, electronic, and online arts—radical rethinking is needed to guarantee public involvement and cultural viability. . Connectivity, immersion, interaction, transformation, and emergence are thus key elements in our cultural transition.

Connectivity of people, places, ideas, media, systems

Immersion of the viewer in the data space of the artist

Interaction with elements of the systems that are encountered

Transformation of media and of the consciousness of the viewer

Emergence of new data, images, forms structures and systems It is the concept of network that integrates the progression of these elements; it is the global Net of telematic networks within which this great transition will be played out. These key tendencies mark what I would describe as the five-fold path towards telenoia, towards a convivial and constructive life in the Net.

Marge Piercy has written evocatively on the Net in her 1991 novel Body of Glass:

The Net was a public utility to which communities, multis, towns, even individuals subscribed. It contained the mutual information of the world, living languages and many dead ones. It indexed available libraries and offered either the

complete text or précis of books and articles. It was the standard way people

communicated, accepting visuals, code or voice. It was also a playing field, a

maze of games and nodes of special interest, a great clubhouse with thousands

of rooms, a place where people met without ever seeing one another unless they

chose to present a visible image—which might or might not be how they actually looked. As an aside, it’s worth noting that Richard Branson has listened closely to Ms. Piercy, introducing his own version of “a great clubhouse” in Virgin Atlantic’s new airport lounge at London Heathrow: British Telecom has contributed its VC7000 videoconferencing system; the CF2000 fax capable of using ISDN’s higher data rates is there, along with a remote surveillance system; the new BT Relate 2000 videophones linked into the world, as well as a PhoneDisc CD-ROM. The world is made visible to travellers by means of a computerised analysis system called Earthview, running on a Mac Quadra 950, taking signals from satellites in a variety of orbits, allowing them to see the earth at different angles and degrees of magnification. It’s essentially interactive, offering much choice of viewing angles, image enhancement and manipulation, including animation in QuickTime. The games room is equally richly endowed with state-of-the-art distractions. While telepresence is limited, net life is certainly present, though in this case, strictly “upper class,” as Branson’s top fare category is called. But the coffee is said to be good, and much telecommunication takes place, so he has no doubt been listening to talk of the Electronic

### Café as well!1

Marge Piercy is serious business. She has enormous empathy for a telematic culture. It is in such post-feminist literary, critical, and cultural writing that we can best take stock of the changes in which we are involved and the trail that we are blazing. Marge Piercy’s novel is an insightful and viable narrative, much more profoundly aware of the radical changes in human sensibilities and relationships in the “cyborg era” than William Gibson’s unidimensional punks could ever be [see Gibson 1984 and Cavallaro 2000—Ed.]. It seems to me that when Richard Rorty calls for the novel to replace philosophy in communicating the new pragmatism [Rorty 1989], Piercy’s work must be seminal in our study of the new relationships between human and artificial consciousness that life in the Net will mean for all of us. Similarly, Donna Haraway’s collection of essays Simians, Cyborgs and Women, and in particular her “Cyborg Manifesto,” provides me with more wisdom concerning the telematic condition of our species than I have encountered in most of the many (male-dominated) conferences and congresses on technoculture over the past ten years [ Haraway 1991].

There is a message here, that scenarios of future states must be radically more than comfortable modifications of the forms and institutions of the earlier eras, with muffled yearnings for the old order, simply tinkering with change. That’s why phrases like “to save something of what once was communication” fill me with foreboding, the fear that we shall lose the telenoic potential of our evolving world Net in yearning for a supposed, passed (and quite mythical) golden age of “natural” human interaction and communication. Human communication has never been “natural,” any more than man or nature has ever been “natural”—if by natural we mean beyond mediation, since it is clear that the constraints and limited range of our biological systems of perception, and the ordering of experience by our languages, involve us in a continual process of constructing our world.

“Nature” itself is a product of this process. Perhaps Umwelt [i.e., milieu; see also chapter 15 above and Uexküll 1934] is a more useful term, as long as we continue to recognise that its definition is always species-dependent. Our species is changing, as a result of increasing bionic, molecular intervention. And not just externally with add-ons and peripherals, but “internally” at the cognitive level of metaphor-processing and meaning-making. Communication is no more imprecise, fuzzy, indeterminate, and subject to negotiation than it ever was, or will be. The human organism is structurally coupled to its “environment,” and communication—whether verbal, gestural, chemical, or electronic—will always be a process of negotiation, of modelling, and of shared construction.

Radical reconstruction, redescription, and redefinition are called for of our world, of our relationships, and of ourselves. And therefore high on the agenda is education as interface, interface as education. Here, too, the telematic rule that context must supersede content applies. It must be the mission of education to provide the space, no doubt a data space, within which the student can be empowered to navigate his own pathways through knowledge. Here we see a merging of functions: of the school, the museum, the library, and even the domestic hearth. All of these once monumentally separate institutions are now to be seen commonly as a matrix within which creativity can evolve through public interactivity. Such a matrix will not be in any way the same as a traditional museum, or school, workshop, studio, production facility, or art centre.

The electronic and post-biological arts of the 1990s will increasingly embody qualities of open-endedness, of sensory immersion of the viewing subject, of intensive interactivity and connectivity, from which new material will emerge and from which a new art will evolve. The new cultural space is the global Net: digitally informed, but interfaced to increasingly “smart” materials and “intelligent” applications. The new institutions we need must constitute networks of fluid, flowing systems, supporting the qualities of open-endedness and emergence, and encouraging connectivity at all levels. They will be dynamic organisms rather than fixed and static structures. They will have to be seeded, data-fed, technologically sustained, and allowed to grow and blossom.

It is important here to make some reference to the impact of this new thinking on the field of industrial design. The designer practising in the telematic culture is a “distributed” designer, a paragon of connectivity, whose technical expertise, imagination, and conceptual skill will be found spread throughout the networks rather than embodied in a single individual. Just as with the artist, the designer becomes a system that includes both human and artificial intelligence. The telematic design process calls for the networking of a constant flow of transient hypotheses. Here are some aspects of the requirements of the design process in the telematic mode: · The overarching need is to design a world fit for telepresence— a fulfilling life in the Net. . Evolution of the teleconducer (the online consumer-producer) will result from increasing consumption and production in the electronic marketplace. . Mind markets, requiring designed products for mental life, will call for close collaboration between the designer and the cognitive scientist. Projects such as the design of bionic interfaces to the world Net and instruments for person-to-person communication in the nanosphere will have to be considered. . Smart materials, adaptive physical systems, and intelligent building components will have to be developed, calling for new architectural initiatives. . Communication systems within and between artificial life forms will have to be designed. . New instruments and systems will have to be designed to enable us to access telememory and the virtualisation of the past. . An architecture for online communities will have to be developed, and this in turn will call for new concepts of domestic living such as the data hearth and ISDN furniture. . Virtual reality has as its interface the total body, and new communications costumes and tele-wear will be required for lounging by the datapool: leisure wear inspired by cyberpunk street fashion. . Zones of tele-meditation will have to be designed to service the increasing need for psychic and spiritual growth within the telematic culture. Perhaps one of the more useful metaphors to describe what is required is the “datapool,” a term I coined as a consultant for the new Ars Electronica Centre in Linz, Austria [see chapter 21 below]. The datapool is that into which, and within which, data in all its modes flows—endlessly transformed through human interaction— and from which it emerges, art-in-flux, flowing on into other domains, other pools, other tributaries of the data sea. This and other such cultural organisms call for new behaviours on the part of the viewing public: no longer to observe, stand back, look from a distance and judge, but to plunge into the datapool, immerse themselves in its fluid changeability, share in its swirling transformations, navigate its knowledge bases, dive to its depths of meaning. This is to call for new standards in public access to art, art not as finite object but as process and system, a fluid, moving stream of data configurations, embodied in networks, on screens, in material structures, in installations and environments, endlessly open to transformation and change.

The Ars Electronica project is a museum of the twenty-first century. But it can also be seen as the college of the future: not reactive but anticipatory, not imposing perspectives on the history of art but opening up a pool of possibilities that emerge as the prospect for the future of art. It will work at the forward edge of contemporary culture, as an agent of cultural change, as a cause of art practice rather than simply as a cultural effect. To take the plunge, to dive into this data world requires a new understanding of art. Just as in the academic world, the computerisation of knowledge means that children must acquire new attitudes to learning, and teachers new attitudes to their teaching, so in art the public need to enjoy new approaches to the electronic environment, learning to immerse themselves in the data field, to interact with the elements it contains, and navigate through its many layers and networks of media and meaning.

Just as contemporary art—in coming to terms with new digital multimedia and the technologies of perception, cognition, and behaviour—builds upon and absorbs the art movements of the past (Cézanne’s mobile viewpoint, the cubist interpenetration of space and time, futurist dynamics, Duchampian conceptualism, Jackson Pollock’s actionism, kinetic art, intermedia, performance, film, photography, video, and early computer graphics), so we can expect, as we approach the twenty-first century, the evolution of entirely new forms, ideas and media, grounded in the art of today. For this reason, the museum/academy of the twenty-first century must be designed to create a context of development for the post-biological arts, for the replacement of artifice with artificial life, and a frame for their cultural evolution in the data sphere. The museum/academy must provide a setting for art from which new visions, new initiatives, new methods can grow. Thus it is a seedbed for the future, a test-bed of present inquiry and experiment, and a fertile ground of historical reference.

The governing perspective within which the evolution of new cultural organisms is viewed is not that of the machine, however, despite our evident reliance on the technological sustenance of computers, systems, and electronic engineering. But, just as the conceptual position of many artists in the technoculture of 1980s was fuelled by metaphors drawn from quantum physics, chaos science, and cosmology, often deconstructionist and inevitably postmodern, so the new metaphors likely to govern the evolution of art in the decade leading us into the twenty-first century will come from the new biology, molecular engineering, smart materials, artificial life, neural networks, cognitive science, and radical constructivism. Not that these two frames are worlds apart. They converge at many points, not least in their challenge to representation as the dominant function of art. Despite the recent popularity of computer simulations of the external surfaces of the world, and of the virtual image, we are witnessing the end of an art in which the mimetic and symbolic were central. Its role in providing representations of the world is shifting to that of creating worlds, of inventing alternative realities, a process in which the observer of art becomes an active participant, a process from which art emerges. The attempt is no longer to imitate life but to emulate it, as part of the co-evolution with nature that is our contemporary goal. We are entering the post-biological era, and it is the intricately woven fabric of telematic networks that will both clothe and carry forward our endeavours.

The new biological perspective is replacing the role of art as representation, just as it is replacing the model of the mind as mirror of the world. There is no little screen within the brain from which some inner homunculus reads out the reflection of the world. Instead, we have Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela’s fecund notion of “structural coupling” of the human organism with its environment, the autonomous, self-creating organism that constructs its world and its reality [ Maturana and Varela 1980, xx ff.].

The computer is also bypassing the screen by beaming laser data directly onto the retina. I was introduced to this by Paul Berger (whose work, along with that of Carl Flax, Manual, and Esther Parada, I had the pleasure to introduce in the catalogue to the first major exhibition of digital photography in Paris, at the Palais de Tokyo [see chapter 17 above]). While discussing this retinal imaging technology with Tom Furness, director, and William Bricken, principal scientist, at the Human Interface Technology Laboratory at the University of Washington in Seattle recently, it became plain to me that alongside this very advanced scientific research, in the heart of these laboratories devoted to the most cutting-edge technology, ideas about education, culture, and social relationships are also evolving, and doing so infinitely more richly than in most of the ateliers and academies of art that I have visited.

The computer has also become biological, as I also learned during that trip. The video artist Tom Sherman, who was my companion on part of the journey, introduced me to the research of Robert Birge, director of the Center for Molecular Electronics at Syracuse University in Syracuse, New York. As we need more and more memory and more and more speed, so we find that semiconductor circuits and disks have little more to give. We look to molecular electronics to quicken the pace of computer operations by 100,000 times and store information to equal a dozen sets of encyclopaedias in a cube that will fit in the palm of your hand. Birge is experimenting with the molecule bacteriorhodopsin, a light-harvesting protein, encoded by laser light. Memories using the bacteriorhodopsin in three dimensions can become five times faster than our present day fastest mass-storage memories—with the memory storage medium little more complicated than a few tablespoons of jelly in a glass. A cube two centimetres on each side might store the entire catalogued holdings of the Library of Congress. By genetically engineering this protein, Birge’s 2 × 2 × 2 cm cube might eventually hold 500 billion bytes. That’s far from the 1,000 billion bytes of the human brain, but Birge’s memory in a cube has considerable implications for the emergence of artificial consciousness in the Net, and for the enhancement of associative thought, just as it can lead to a richer complexity in our processes of structural coupling with the world.

Similarly, George Gilder, a leading American commentator in the field of computer development and technological innovation, alerts us to the confident prediction in the research community of one billion transistors being laid on a single chip within the next ten years [Gilder 1993]. That’s the power of sixteen Cray supercomputers (currently costing some $320 million) on a chip costing less than $100.

Well, of course, we can brush aside such prognostications, if we will (and in Britain we most certainly shall), although it is easily seen that if only a half of that is achieved, the consequences for human behaviour will be enormous. Less easy to ignore, however, is the infrastructure that already is being set out to link minds, machines, data banks, and production facilities in an awesome global connectivity. Here I am referring to the same evolutionary leap that President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore refer to in the letter that everyone on the Internet received from them on June 1, 1993, about the ACE programme, “Americans Communicating Electronically.” The political implications of all that, both in the United States and Japan, where “high fibre” is taken seriously (and not as a dietary supplement), and in Europe, particularly the United Kingdom, where our clinging to copper wire is almost pathological, is one thing. But it is difficult to see how the eventual ubiquity of optical fibre, particularly the almost infinitely data-capacious “dark fibre,” can, in any evolutionary sense, be resisted. In case you are not familiar with dark fibre, I’ll quote George Gilder: “Fibre comes in threads, as thin as a human hair, as long as the British Isles, fed by lasers as small as a grain of salt and as bright as the sun. A single fibre thread can potentially hold all the telephone calls in the United States at a peak moment of Mother’s Day. Fibre is not really a replacement for copper (wires) . . . it’s a replacement for air” [BBC 1993]. As Paul Green of IBM’s Advanced Optical Networking Research Division says, “Dark fibre, lit with different colours for different protocols will deliver one thousand times our present total broadcasting capacity” [Green 1993]. Oh, yes, and by the way, given that our political leaders and policy-makers will most certainly ignore all this, the invention that has released optical fibre from the erstwhile bottlenecked, logjam of information flow (suffered by its reliance on electronic amplification), that of the Erbium Doped Amplifier, which will send an infinity of messages through glass on wings of light, has been developed by a British scientist, David Payne of the Optoelectronics Research Centre at Southampton University. Payne notes that, “We have created the communications engineer’s Holy Grail—the dream communications system, capable of communicating over vast distances with huge information capacity. The next question is, what do we actually do with it?” [BBC 1993].

That, I am sure you will agree, is at the top of our agenda as artists. It is within the net that any human and creative answer must be found. In other words, it’s a matter of total immersion in this cobweb of light, this honeycomb of illuminated colour. It is from the complexity of interactions within the Net, that the new “art” can be expected to emerge.

But this “art” is becoming so fundamentally different from the art of the past that it seems to constitute an entirely new field of creative endeavour. That is why many of us involved in this field think it would be best if a new word could be found to describe it. The term “art” is too heavy with the meanings given to it by both romanticism and classicism, as well as, of course, by modernism, and too deeply embedded in the notion of the individual creator and the reactive rather than interactive viewer, for us to feel properly represented by it. It’s not that we think we have redefined art in its totality or that the art with its roots in those earlier orders is no longer practised with vigour and with contemporary relevance. Only society can determine that. But we feel that we cannot go on much longer having to define our terms every time we engage in conversation about art, to make it plain that it is this art, the art of interactivity and of intelligent systems, that we are discussing; not that art, the art of established orthodoxies and practices. Maybe we should try to avoid using the term “art” as far as possible, in these circumstances, and use the term “connectivism” when we are referring to telematic art practice. All art practice involving computermediated systems and electronic media of any given complexion is by definition telematic; connectivity is at its core. Maybe all artists engaged in the field should be called “connectivists.” On second thoughts, maybe not! We’ve had too many “-ists” and “-isms” this century. But the term would provide a happy, although perhaps rather facile, complementarity to the “connectionists” who are developing the very neural nets that the next generation of artists will most certainly employ.

Just as the “artist” is fast becoming a complex and widely distributed system, in which both human and artificial cognition and perception play their part, so art is no longer primarily a matter of representation but of emergence, ordering itself from a multiplicity of chaotic interactions in telematic data space, within the structural coupling of what we know as human evolution. The key to our understanding of this evolution lies within the domain of consciousness. It is my belief that the quality of telenoia in our structural relationships with the world and between one another will define the new qualities of art in the technological culture.

### NOTE

1 Ascott refers here to the Electronic Cafe International, a prototype cybercafe founded by artists Kit Galloway and Sherrie Rabinowitz in Santa Monica in 1984.—Ed.
