---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: null
chapter: null
title: "Preface"
source_pages: "xv-xix"
type: source
---

# Preface

In this time of confusion over what art is and what its role ought to be, I have often wished I could recommend a brief history of the idea of art to students and friends. Not finding what I wanted, I wrote this one. Although it has a strong point of view, I believe that is the best way to throw contemporary issues into relief. I tell a story of art divided in the eighteenth century and our seeking in vain to overcome that division ever since. My aim in telling this story is not to produce a new theory of art but to put the question of art in a historical context that can help people make better sense of it. There are other stories that could be told, but I believe this one does justice to the evidence in a way that even readers who disagree with its perspective may find useful.

That perspective has been shaped by a series of experiences that go back to an incident that occurred many years ago. When I was about fifteen, my parents took us on a vacation trip from Kansas to Chicago to hear the Chicago Symphony and to visit the Art Institute and other museums. Although I was excited by the symphony and by paintings like Seurat s La Grande Jatte at the Art Institute, I was equally fascinated by another museum a few blocks away, the Field Museum of Natural History, with its endless cases full of African, Oceanic, and Native American artifacts: bowls and tools, shields and spears, chieftains chairs and staffs, some scary-looking power figures, many masks, and costumes. A few years later, when I transferred to the Chicago area to complete my senior year of college, I went back to the Art Institute and discovered that some of those African figures and masks (minus the costumes) seemed to have miraculously migrated up the street from the Field Museum to enter the Art Institute. I didn’t see any problem with their transformation into “art” until one day in an anthropology class Melville Herskovits pointed out that not only was there no category of “art” in most African languages, but, in addition, once masks and power figures were used in religious rituals, they were typically wrapped up and stored away until needed again. Suddenly, the very idea of “art” seemed problematic.

It wasn’t until many years later that I discovered an important clue to understanding what happens when we turn ritual works into “art.” I came across Paul Oskar Kristeller’s article arguing that the modern concept of art only dates from the eighteenth century when an older functional idea of art Vas definitively split into the categories of fine art and craft. I now saw what had happened when those African masks escaped the dusty company of bowls and spears at the Field Museum to go live with the Rembrandts and Seurats at the Art Institute. In the Field Museum, African ritual and utilitarian objects were indeed art, but in the older sense of things made for a purpose, and so they served as exemplars of a way of life. Once transferred to the Art Institute they became (fine) art, or things meant for aesthetic looking: tokens of art itself.

One of the lessons I learned in my struggle to understand what happens when African or Native American ritual objects are transformed into art in the modern sense is that institutions such as the museum, the concert hall, and the literature curriculum have been central to constituting things as art. I soon came to the conclusion that we could no longer do either aesthetics or the history and criticism of music, art, and literature in traditional ways. I became something of a pest, constantly taking my fellow academics to task for not prefacing their eager praise of African or Native American or Chinese “art” with some sort of disclaimer. These colleagues were understandably irritated since they sincerely believed they were engaged in a worthy, even complimentary, pursuit and wanted to get on with their aesthetic appreciation and analysis. Although most of them were prepared to admit that the meaning of “art” might differ from culture to culture or that it had changed some in our own culture since the eighteenth century, they didn’t view cultural and historical differences as having significant consequences in the way I did.

Meanwhile, something equally important had been taking place in the arts themselves. By the time I finished graduate school and settled into my first teaching job in the early 1960s, abstract expressionism was already being challenged by neodada and pop art. Over the next two decades, new art movements and approaches succeeded each other at a dizzying pace: pop, op, minimal, conceptual, neorealism, land art, video, performance, installation, and so on. Soon it seemed as if artists in every medium were trying to overthrow the boundaries of art and overcome the separation of “art” and “life.” By the 1980s, when I began gathering material for this book, I realized that any history of the ideas of art, artist, and the aesthetic not only would have to give an important place to social and institutional changes but would also need to bring the story from the eighteenth century down to the present and pay particular attention to efforts to overcome the polarities of the modern fine art system.

Moreover, for such a history to be useful as a background source for students and general readers, it could not be based on one of the arts alone, or even the visual arts as a group, but it would need to include both literature and music as well. The books usefulness also required that, despite covering so many topics and periods, it had to be brief and written in a nontechnical style. With those aims in mind, I have obviously had to sacrifice much in the way of qualifiers and nuances and keep footnotes and references to a minimum. Even so, I have used many quotations from artists and thinkers of the past to give something of the force and flavor of their views, and I have chosen illustrations that sometimes convey aspects of thought and behavior better than words would. I owe an enormous intellectual debt to the authors of articles, monographs, and surveys of the history of the various arts and aesthetics, only some of which are listed in the references. But there are also many particular debts I want to acknowledge specifically.

Present and former colleagues at the University of Illinois at Springfield have read parts of the manuscript or listened to its themes and offered valuable advice and encouragement: Harry Berman, Piotr Boltuc, Ed Cell, Cecilia Cornell, Razak Dahmane, Cullom Davis, Anne Devaney, Judy Everson, Mauri Formigoni, Ron Havens, Mark Heyman, Linda King, J. Michael Lennon, Ethan Lewis, Deborah McGregor, Robert McGregor, Christine Nelson, Margaret Rossiter, Marsha Salner, Karl Scroggin, Judy Shereikis, Richard Shereikis, Mark Siebert, Bill Siles, Larry Smith, Don Stanhope, and Charles B. Strozier. I am especially grateful to Peter Wenz, who read and commented on many chapters. I am also grateful to the many students in my philosophy of art and history of literary theory courses over the years who read and responded to versions of the manuscript. I thank friends from the Central Illinois Philosophy Group: George Agich, Jose Arce, Meredith Cargill, Bernd Estabrook, Royce Jones, Robert Kunath, and Richard Palmer. I am grateful to the many colleagues in the American Society for Aesthetics who have listened to and critiqued papers related to the book as it developed over the years and made a number of helpful suggestions: Sondra Bacharach, Joyce Brodsky, Anthony J. Cascardi, Ted Cohen, Arthur Danto, Mary Devereux, Dennis Dutton, Jo Ellen Jacobs, Michael Kelly, Carolyn Korsmeyer, Estella Lauter, Tom Leddy, Paul Mattick, Joan Pearlman, Yuriko Saito, Barbara Sandrisser, Gary Schapiro, Catherine Soussloff, Kevin Sweeney, and Mary Wiseman. Carolyn Korsmeyer also read several chapters and gave good advice as always. My special thanks to Micheline Guiton, Bill and Vivian Heywood, Shigeo and Louise Kanda, Mike and Donna Lennon, Thomas Mikelson and Patricia Sheppard, Bob and Nona Richardson, Richard and Judy Shereikis, Kevin Sweeney and Elizabeth Winston, and Etienne and Ann Trocme for their patience, encouragement and suggestions over the years in many settings.

The book is richer because of three National Endowment for the Humanities Summer Seminars at which I worked on pieces of it. My thanks to my summer colleagues and to the seminar directors: Frances Ferguson and Ronald Paulson on eighteenth century art and aesthetics at Johns Hopkins, Jules Brody for the seminar on seventeenth-century French literature at Harvard, and particularly to Alvin Kernan, whose stimulating ideas and warm encouragement during his seminar on literature and society at Princeton meant a great deal. I am also grateful to the University of Illinois at Springfield for two sabbatical leaves that were crucial to the book’s inception and completion and to Dean William Bloemer, Provost Wayne Penn, and Chancellor Naomi Lynn for their assistance and encouragement. Over the years I have incurred an enormous debt of gratitude to the staff of Brookens Library at the University of IUinois at Springfield, especially to Beverly Frailey, Denise Green, John Holz, Dick Kipp, Linda Kopecky, Mary Jane MacDonald, Nancy Stump, Ned Wass, and the late Florence Lewis. Other libraries and institutions that have been important are the one at the University of IUinois at Urbana-Champaign, in particular Nancy Romero of the Rare Book and Special CoUections division, and the Biblio-theque National in Paris, especiahy the staff of the Cabinet des Estampes. I am also grateful to Kent Smith and Jan Wass of the IUinois State Museum in Springfield for their advice and encouragement. James Clifford and Hayden White were generous with their time and ideas during a sabbatical I spent at the University of California, Santa Cruz. I received valuable counsel from Annie Becq, now retired from the Universite de Caen in France, whose history of French aesthetics remains indispensable. Robin Briggs of Oxford University and Martha Woodmansee of Case Western Reserve University also gave useful advice. At a crucial point in the late stages of gestation, an invitation from Christopher Breiseth and J. Michael Lennon to give a public lecture at Wilkes University helped me find the right voice for the audience I sought. I am grateful to Deborah Roese for her editorial reading, Margie Towery for the index, Lula Lester for the careful work on the reference section, and Julie AtweU for secretarial help. I also want to thank Doug MitcheU, Executive Editor at the University of Chicago Press, for his faith in the manuscript and his suggestions along the way, Robert Devens for his special help in preparing the manuscript and illustrations, and Yvonne Zipter for her many cogent editorial suggestions. I want to remember Gene Swenson, a friend of my youth in Topeka, Kansas, gone many years now, who first opened my eyes to the importance of pop art when we were both in the New York area in the late 1950s and who was one of the first critics to champion it. Recently, I had a chance to spend time with another classmate from Topeka, Dr. Douglas Sheafor, and his wife Bo, whose conversation around their glass kiln deepened my appreciation of the dignity and artistry of the craft arts. Finally, I thank my sisters Kay Klausmeier and Carol Wilson and their husbands for offering me shelter and encouragement during two sabbaticals and several summer writing stints. Special thanks to my daughter, Suzanna, for help with the illustrations and for solving computer conundrums and my son Larry for memorable meals along the way. But my deepest debt is to my wife, Catherine Walters, who put up with this paper rival for over ten years with uncommon generosity and patience and offered good advice as always. The Invention of Art
