---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 1
chapter: 2
title: "Aquinas’s Saw"
source_pages: "28-34"
type: source
---

# Chapter 2: Aquinas’s Saw

In the medieval period, many arts that the modern world has relegated to the status of crafts were as admired as painting or sculpture. Medieval and early Renaissance embroiderers, for example, produced works of astonishing pictorial and decorative accomplishment, using silk and metal threads, jewels, pearls, and beaten gold (fig. 3). Nor were embroiderers merely skilled laborers who sewed the designs of others; Henry Ill’s commission to the respected embroiderer Mabel of Bury St. Edmunds asked for the Virgin and Saint John but left the design up to her (Parker 1984). Medieval people made no division like ours between fine arts and “mere” crafts. Lists of the arts from Augustine in the fifth century to Aquinas in the thirteenth mixed painting, sculpture, and architecture with cooking, navigation, horsemanship, shoemaking, and juggling.

## From “Servile” to “Mechanical” Arts

Early Medieval writers did continue the late Greco-Roman division of the arts into “liberal” versus the “vulgar” or “servile” and, for educational purposes, divided the liberal arts into the trivium (logic, grammar, rhetoric) and quadriv-ium (arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music theory). As Elspeth Whitney has shown, by the twelfth century an incisive change occurred in the way of conceiving the traditional opposition between the “liberal” and “vulgar” arts (1990). Hugh of St. Victor made an influential argument for replacing the pejorative terms “vulgar” or “servile” with the term “mechanical arts,” claiming that since there were seven liberal arts there should be seven mechanical arts. In the ancient world, mechanics had been a discipline of applied mathematics for moving heavy objects, but by the ninth century, its meaning had broadened to include all the manual arts. Of itself, the new name and the parallel with the liberal arts gave the mechanical arts greater dignity, but Hugh went much further, making the mechanical arts an equal partner with the theoretical arts (philosophy, physics) and practical arts (politics, ethics) in the restoration of fallen humanity. Just as the theoretical arts were given by God as a remedy for our igno-Figure 3. British cope (late fifteenth century): silk, broken-warp chevron twill weave-cut voided velvet; appliqued with linen, plain weave; couching; embroidered with silk and gilt-strip-wrapped silk and satin and split stitches; laid work, couching and padded couching; spangles, 114 X 291.1 centimeters. Grace R. Smith Textile Endowment, 1971.312a. Photograph © 2000, Art Institute Chicago. All Rights Reserved. ranee and the practical arts as a remedy for our vices, according to Hugh, so the mechanical arts remedy our physical weakness.

Now there are three works—the work of God, the work of nature, and the work of the artificer, who imitates nature. The work of God is to create ... the work of nature is to bring forth into actuality... the work of the artificer is to put together things disjoined. Man alone is brought forth naked and unarmed ... mans reason shines forth much more brilliantly in inventing things than ... had man naturally possessed them. From this the infinite varieties of painting, weaving, carving, and founding have arisen, so that we look with wonder not at nature alone but at the artificer as well. (Whitney 1990, 91) Hughs seven mechanical arts—weaving, armament, commerce, agriculture, hunting, medicine, and theatrics—were actually general categories with many subdivisions.1 Architecture was mentioned as a subdivision of armatura or “constructed coverings,” and “theatrics” included entertainments of any kind, including wrestling, racing, and dances (table 1). By the end of the twelfth century, the term “mechanical arts” had become standard in the West, although Hugh’s particular list was often modified.

Yet Hugh’s attempt to give the mechanical arts a higher status was soon challenged by the arrival of Arabic philosophy and the complete corpus of TABLE 1 Medieval Classifications of the Arts Disciplines Liberal arts (vs. “servile arts”): Trivium Grammar, rhetoric, logic Quadrivium Arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, music Mechanical arts (Hugh of St. Victor) Weaving, armament,* commerce, agriculture, hunting, medicine, theatrics1 * Includes arms, forging, architecture, and so on. +Includes wrestling, racing, dances, epic recitals, puppet plays, and so forth. Aristotle’s preserved writings. Thomas Aquinas, for example, accepted Aristotle’s disjuncture between the theoretical sciences and the productive arts, as well as Aristotle’s tendency to look upon utility and paid work as degrading. As a result, Aquinas could write that “those arts that are ordered to some utility through performing an action are called mechanical, or servile” (Whitney 1990, 140). Thus, already in the thirteenth century, the “Victorine moment,” when all arts/crafts were granted a place of dignity, was challenged by a powerful resurgence of the ancient depreciation of utility and handwork as “vulgar” and “servile.” Even so, many medieval writers continued to respect all the arts, embroidery as well as painting, pottery as well as sculpture, forging as well as architecture and, like Hugh of St. Victor, gave them a place of dignity in the scheme of creation and the system of knowledge.

## Artificers

In the medieval period, the term artista was usually reserved for those who studied the liberal arts, whereas a person engaged in the production or performance of one of the many mechanical arts was often called an artifex. Even terms that are more specific, such as “painter,” “sculptor,” and “architect,” did not have the sense they do today. The medieval painter was primarily a “decorative” artificer, covering the walls of churches, public buildings, and the houses of the wealthy and painting furniture, banners, shields, and signs on commission. There were seldom any separate guilds for the individual arts; painters often belonged to the druggists guild (since they ground their own pigments), sculptors to the goldsmiths guild, and architects to the stone masons guild, although there is evidence some architects had a more gentlemanly status.2 Most medieval artificers, whether stone carvers, ceramists, or painters, worked for patrons who often specified content, general design, and materials. Further, the medieval artificer generally responded to commissions not as an individual but, rather, as a member of a workshop in which various aspects of the job were shared out. Yet even though artificers often held the lower status associated with manual labor, most of the mechanical arts required intelligent planning, imaginative conception, and sound judgment, as well as manual dexterity. But the artificer, as Bonaventura said, was a maker, not a creator. God creates nature out of nothing, nature in turn brings potential being to actuality; the artificer simply modifies what nature has made actual. This attitude remained the norm in the medieval period despite occasional hints at something more modern (Eco 1986).

Yet the desire to project our modern ideals onto the past dies hard. For several decades now, historians of medieval art have been attacking the old stereotype of the anonymous medieval artisan. According to a popular myth, the sculptors and stained-glass makers of the great cathedrals worked only for the glory of God and never signed their works. Thanks to a massive sleuthing job, medieval specialists have uncovered a number of signatures and evidence that many carvers and painters developed regional reputations. Although this work is a welcome corrective, some interpreters have jumped to the conclusion that it is evidence of “individualism” and the modern idea of the “artist.” Such a conclusion is only possible if one ignores the workshop context of most production, the central role of the patron and client, and the fact that the pride expressed by the signature was more likely to have been in craft skill and innovation than in something akin to modern notions of creativity and originality. But the revisionists are right to reject the idea that the medieval sculptor or painter was a “mere” craftsman who simply followed pattern books and workshop routines. Both the wielders of the old stereotype of anonymity and the modernizing revisionists are trapped in the same binary polarities of the modern system of art. The medieval artisan/artist was neither the anonymous craftsman of the romantics nor the modern individualist of the revisionists.3

Just as there was no invidious categorical division of artist from artisan in the Middle Ages, there was no sharp gender division in the production of the arts. Few trades or arts were practiced exclusively by either men or women. One reason was that a good deal of production came from religious orders. Fine illuminated manuscripts and elaborate embroidery as well as religious poetry and musical settings issued from both female and male religious houses. As for secular production, women painted, wove, carved and stitched alongside men in the family workshops. This is not to suggest some idyllic equality since women were discriminated against in law, status, and pay as much then as later. But there was not yet the general separation of public and private that contributed 3i to the domestication of women in later centuries. Not only were medieval women master shoemakers, bakers, armorers, goldsmiths, painters, and embroiderers, but they also often belonged to guilds, usually through their husbands but sometimes on their own (femmes soles). Widowed craftihvomen had the right to continue the family workshop and to train apprentices. In some places women came to dominate certain crafts (silk making in Paris), and a few women became successful entrepreneurs, handling the work of others.

If the modern notion of the artist has little relevance to the medieval practice of painting, sculpture, architecture, ceramics, embroidery, and the other visual arts, it is equally far from the dominant practice of poetry in the Middle Ages. The Middle Ages is an enormously long and complex period, and this is especially true with respect to language and literature, which saw a split between Latin as the only written language, known primarily to the clergy, and the many vernaculars that only gradually came to assume a written form. Poetry as learned in the schools was a necessary part of mastering Latin for those who wished to be a clericus or litteras. To be a poet in the Middle Ages was more often associated with sweat than inspiration. And the motive for mastering Latin versification, when it went beyond preparing for examinations was often to enable one to “turn out compliments, epitaphs, petitions, dedications and thus gain favor with the powerful or correspond with equals” (Curtius 1953,468). Of course, the scholar-poets complained of the need to earn a living by seeking service to a patron or locating a benefice, and the ancient commonplace about poetic frenzy was dutifully handed on and would bear fruit in the Renaissance. Although the vernacular troubadour-sung poetry of southern France was much freer than the poetics taught in the schools, it would be anachronistic to speak of it in terms of romantic conceptions of originality, nor was the troubadour tradition normative for the general idea of poetry. By the end of the thirteenth century, the first great work of vernacular poetry appeared: Dante’s Divine Comedy, which opened the way for the more self-consciously “literary” writings of Petrarch and Boccaccio. Yet the art of rhetoric still provided the framework within which these writers made such inventive use of forms and tropes. Like the sculptor or painter, the medieval poet was neither the modern literary artist preoccupied with originality and self-expression nor the mere craftsman applying scholastic rules (Auerbach 1993).

Our notion of the musician as artist-composer is also as distant from medieval conceptions and practices as modern ideas of the poet. As a liberal art, of course, music was a theoretical science concerning general ideas of cosmic harmony and mathematical relations. Although some of the preceptors in the cathedral schools became well known, and their hymns and settings for parts of the mass were circulated, there was little hesitation about altering and improving them in the process. In music, as in the realm of poetry and prose, women composers in religious houses were as productive and respected as those of men, as the recent revival of the remarkable musical compositions of Hildegard of Bingen reminds us. In secular music, the general distinction between the liberal and mechanical also held sway. The highborn enjoyed singing and might accompany themselves on an instrument for private pleasure, but they also had court entertainers, the jongleurs, that loose category of jugglers, acrobats, dancers, animal trainers, singers, and instrumentalists who provided diversion. Because these employed musicians composed and played for pay, they belonged to the mechanical arts and, vis-a-vis the nobility, had the same lowly status as hired poets, painters, or tailors. Such musical servants often went on the road seeking employment in other aristocratic or merchant households, and many settled down as town musicians, where duties might include watchman and sounding the hours as well as playing for weddings, funerals, and other ceremonial occasions. Thus, the higher status medieval musician was a pure theoretician, an aristocratic amateur, or a church or court official, including the leading composer/performers, whereas most “professional” musicians were regarded as part of the mass of artisan/artists working with their hands for pay. Instead of the self-conscious modern composer creating independent musical “works of art,” the majority of musicians were composer-performers whose music was meant to accompany social and religious life (Raynor 1978).

When we put together all the evidence about stone carvers, glassblowers, embroiderers, architects, poets, religious, and secular musicians, it is clear that despite isolated cases, both the modern concept of “the artist” and its polar opposite, the “mere artisan,” are concepts deeply inappropriate to this disparate group. In the long medieval period, which blends seamlessly into the early Renaissance, there were neither “artists” nor “artisans” but artisan/artists of varied ranks and statuses.

## The Idea of Beauty

Medieval thinking was also as far removed from modern conceptions of the aesthetic as it was from modern ideas of art and the artist. This does not mean that medieval people were blind to the beauty of line, shape, or color or that they found no pleasure in harmony, rhyme, or trope but only that appearance was not systematically separated from content and function. Poetry, for example, was still conceived to have the dual function of instruction and pleasure (Horace) and one of the main justifications for allowing images in Western churches was their didactic function. Music was still primarily devised to accompany texts, and even secular music was largely tied to social function.

As for the idea of beauty, many medieval philosophers and theologians reflected on it, but most discussions of beauty dwelt on the beauty of Sod and Nature, not the beauty of the products and performances of human art. As in antiquity, the term “beauty” had a much wider meaning than it does today, embracing moral value and utility along with pleasing appearance. Among those theologians who did discuss the beauty of mundane things, the harmony of parts or proportion within an object was not enough to make it beautiful; only right proportion in relation to purpose could do that. “Stained glass, music, and sculpture were not beautiful simply because they gave pleasure. They might give pleasure, or they might give instruction; but in either case, the me-dievals took the view that their true beauty lay in their conformity with their purpose” (Eco 1988,183).

Nevertheless, well-meaning historians eager to rescue the Middle Ages from enlightened opprobrium have reinterpreted theological texts against their obvious meaning, looking everywhere for signs of a “secular” aesthetic attitude. But to read the modern idea of aesthetic disinterest into passing comments of Scotus Erigena or into the creation of gargoyles or Romanesque capitals is as false to the general outlook of the Middle Ages as is the stereotype of a relentless religious functionalism.4 This constant search for signs of a purely aesthetic response reveals the stultifying restriction produced by the modern art-versus-craft polarity. As David Freedberg has shown, historians under its spell tend to dismiss those pieces designed to arouse an immediate emotional response as craft or religious kitsch (1989). It seems more plausible to suggest that in the Middle Ages there was neither fine art nor craft in the modern sense but only arts and that people responded to function, content, and form together rather than holding one or the other in suspension.

If an artificer, Aquinas said, should decide to make a saw more beautiful by constructing it out of glass, the result would not only be useless as a saw and thus a failed piece of art, it would not be beautiful either (Summa Theolog-ica I—II, 57, 3c). Today, of course, making a saw out of glass would guarantee it to be a work of art, perhaps exhibited under the title Aquinas’s Saw. And no doubt this glass saw would inspire an equally clever artist, in imitation of Duchamp, to purchase an ordinary saw at the nearest hardware and offer it as a counterexhibit, perhaps as Occam’s Saw.
