---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 1
chapter: 3
title: "Michelangelo and Shakespeare: Art on the Rise"
source_pages: "35-56"
type: source
---

# Chapter 3: Michelangelo and Shakespeare: Art on the Rise

On april 25, 1483, Leonardo da Vinci signed a contract with the Confraternity of the Conception of the Virgin in Milan to “deliver by December 8” an altar painting with “mountains and rocks” in the background and “Our Lady in the middle ... her upper garments of ultramarine blue, brocaded with Gold” and to repair any degradation that might occur (Glasser 1977,164-69). The requirements to which Leonardo submitted for Virgin of the Rocks hardly fit our idea of the artist s total autonomy (fig. 4). But what happened next fits our modern assumptions even less. Leonardo was only one of at least three people working on the altarpiece, as we learn from court records that show he and the other painter sued because the carver of the wooden framework for the altar, Giacomo del Maino, was being paid more than they were. They finally got 1,000 ducats to his 700 (Kemp 1997). Giacomo was not the only Renaissance carver to be paid more than painters for the kind of ornate frameworks, with arches, pinnacles, and sculpted figures, that surrounded pictures.1 We are so used to thinking of paintings as autonomous art objects and painters as lone creators that it comes as a shock to learn that the typical Renaissance painter was simply one member of the teams that decorated altarpieces, council chambers, townhouses, and palaces.

## Opening up the Liberal Arts

Even so, the period between roughly 1350 and 1600 that we call the Renaissance also saw the beginnings of a long and gradual transition from the old art/craft system toward our modern fine art system. But the beginning of a transition is not an establishment; the assumptions of the old art system continued to regulate most practices despite the appearance of new ideas and attitudes among a small elite. Unfortunately, popularizers and historians preoccupied with the quest for “origins” have treated this elite as typical and presented what were important but fragmentary beginnings as if they were normative. As a result, we

*Figure 4. Leonardo da*

Vinci, Virgin of the Rocks (1483). Courtesy Reunion des Musees Natkmaux, Paris.

Believed to be the picture painted in response to the contract of 1483 even though it lacks the gold brocade that the contract called for on the blue robe. Now in the Louvre. have become so accustomed to viewing Renaissance paintings as isolated works of art or reading Elizabethan plays as autonomous works of literature that we are surprised to discover that the Renaissance did not even possess the category of fine art.

Certainly, painting, sculpture, and architecture, along with their makers, achieved a higher prestige than in the Middle Ages, and some people explored the kinship between the visual and verbal arts. But the three visual arts were not joined with poetry and music to form a distinct new category under a general title. Down through most of the seventeenth century, leading scholars still adhered to the liberal versus mechanical arts scheme, associating poetry with grammar and rhetoric, music theory with geometry and astronomy, among the liberal arts, and placing painting and sculpture among the mechanical arts, along with cloth making, metalwork, and agriculture. The humanist teachers did create a new pedagogical grouping, called the studia humanitatis, by expanding the old medieval trivium of grammar, rhetoric, and logic. They kept grammar and rhetoric, replaced logic with poetry, and added history and moral philosophy. But in general the Renaissance had “no real equivalent of our ‘Fine Art”’ (Kemp 1997, 226; see also Kristeller 1990; Farago 1991) (table 2).

table 2 The Liberal Arts and the Studia Humanitatis in the Renaissance Disciplines Liberal arts:

Trivium Grammar, rhetoric, logic Quadrivium Arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, music Studia humanitatis Grammar, rhetoric, poetry, history, moral philosophy Although the modern category of fine art had not yet arrived, there were some significant steps in the modern direction. Horace’s phrase, “poetry is like painting” (utpictura poesis), for example, was used by a number of painters and humanist scholars to justify making painting one of the liberal arts, and an aristocratic dialogue like The Courtier could praise painting as worthy of a gentleman’s attention (Castiglione 1959; Lee 1967). On the institutional side, a group of Florentine painters and sculptors led by Giorgio Vasari set up an Academy of Design” in 1563, giving the members exemption from guild regulations and emphasizing their claim to liberal arts status. But not only did the phrase “arts of design” not include music and poetry, it did “not entail any aesthetic

*Figure 5. Benvenuto Cellini, saliera (saltcellar): Neptune (sea) and Tellus (earth); gold, niello work, and ebony base (1540-43). Kunsthistorisches Museum, Kunstkammer, Vienna. Courtesy Erich Lessing/Art Resource, New York. The saltcellar was set on wheels, and in his autobiography, Cellini describes how he and some friends enjoyed rolling it to each other around the table before he delivered it.*

statement” (Barasch 1985, 114). Moreover, many of the wealthiest and best-informed Renaissance patrons throughout Italy and Northern Europe were avid sponsors of what we would call craft or decorative arts—miniatures, carved gems, medals, majolica ware, fancy inkwells, sumptuous inlaid coffers—which are often valued more highly in Renaissance inventories than paintings or sculptures (Robertson 1992). Of course, some of these utilitarian items were indeed bravura performances, such as Cellini s elaborately wrought silver saltcellar for Francis I (fig. 5). But neither wealthy patrons nor the average Florentine or Venetian saw an enormous gulf between the work of the best ceramists or cabinetmakers and that of the painters and sculptors (Goldthwaite 1980).

## The Changing Status of Artisan/Artists

Just as the Renaissance lacked our category of fine art, so it lacked our ideal of the autonomous artist pursuing self-expression and originality. For several decades now the old emphasis on Renaissance secularism, individualism, and subjectivity has been rejected by historians who see a greater continuity with the Middle Ages than with our modern age (Burke 1997).2 What made it easy for some nineteenth-century historians to project the modern image of the autonomous artist back on the Renaissance is that there were important improvements in the status and image of musicians, painters, and writers. In the case of music, for example, Italian princes like the Estes, Sforzas, Gonzagas, and Medici put on lavish court spectacles that enlarged the scope and prestige of secular music and provided regular employment to scores of musicians. The slightly disreputable medieval jongleur wandering from court to court was turning into the uniformed minstrel, housed and fed in the palace with other domestic servants. Although the modern separation of composer and performer was not yet normative, the beginning of music printing in 1501 would eventually make it possible. The most celebrated musicians, such as Adrian Willaert and Josquin des Prez, were known for their compositions and had considerable freedom to move from court to court. This increased status was reinforced by the humanist scholars’ discovery of ancient texts that suggested the Greeks had sung their tragedies, leading to a new emphasis on the need for music to express the sense of the text, a trend especially evident in the four-part madrigals that were sung as part of upper-class sociality. Some musicologists, impressed with these developments and with the fact that Listenius wrote of the “artificer” leaving behind an “absolute and perfect work,” have been led to claim that music became a “fine art” in the Renaissance (Lippman 1992). But the occasional Renaissance use of the term “work,” while it suggests a step in the modern direction, hardly amounts to the arrival of the modern concepts of the autonomous “work of art” and the sovereign artist. Most musicians remained composer/players who turned out functional pieces on schedule for their employers and freely recycled parts of their own pieces and borrowed from others (Goehr 1992).3

In the arts of painting, sculpture, and architecture there was an even greater advance in the status and image of the artisan/artist. Unfortunately, popular accounts have blown this out of proportion, casting figures like Michelangelo in the role of a tortured genius striving for self-expression, a kind of Van Gogh with ears intact. Not only is this postromantic image wide of the mark for Michelangelo, it applies even less to the majority of Renaissance painters and sculptors. Once we set aside these romantic simplifications, we can more objectively assess the modernity of the Renaissance idea of the artist.4 Three kinds of evidence suggest the beginnings of the modern concept of the artist: the emergence of the genre of the “artist’s biography,” the development of the self-portrait, and the rise of the “court artist.”

The new literary genre of the artist’s biography treated the painter, sculptor, or architect as a hero figure after the pattern of the poet, celebrating individual accomplishments that exceeded traditional workshop skills (Soussloff 1997)• Several Renaissance artisan /artists such as Ghiberti and Cellini evdn wrote autobiographies. The most famous and influential collection of artists’ biographies were those produced by Vasari, also the central figure in founding the Florentine Academy, and it is no surprise that his book reflects an animus toward the guilds and production for everyday use. Yet there are aspects of even Vasari’s book that undercut the popular image of the “Renaissance Artist.” Vasari, for example, did not—and could not—write a book called Lives of the Artists as some translations have it, but Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. It is a small but crucial difference. During the Renaissance there was no regulative concept of “the artist that separated painters, sculptors, and architects collectively from glassblowers, ceramists, and embroiders. The term often used by Vasari and others was still artifice, artificer. Some translations of Vasari render artifice as “artist,” but others translate it as “craftsman” or “artisan” and at least one popular English abridgment arbitrarily switches between the two terms, sometimes in the same sentence. Here is such a translation of Vasari’s description of his reaction at the first sight of Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel frescoes: “What a happy age we live in! And how fortunate are our craftsmen [artifice] who have been given light and vision by Michelangelo and whose difficulties have been smoothed away by this marvelous and incomparable artist [artifice:J!” (Vasari 1965, 360). Although Vasari uses the same root, “artificer” (artifice), for Michelangelo and other painters, the translator couldn’t bring himself to call Michelangelo a craftsman, but set up a verbal opposition that was not regulative in Vasari’s time (Vasari 1991a). None of the major European languages at this time made a systematic conceptual distinction between “artist” and “craftsman” in the modern sense.5

Although early Renaissance painters had occasionally shown themselves among the crowd of worshipers in devotional paintings, by 1450 the new genre of the independent self-portrait had emerged in Italy. A recent study of these self-portraits has shown that most were by a small group of court artists who were clearly making high status claims by the way they presented themselves—dressed like gentlemen and looking directly at the viewer, often with no sign of the manual aspect of their work (Woods-Marsden 1998). But the most famous self-portraits of the Renaissance came not from Italy but Germany where Albrecht Diirer not only showed himself in the leisurely pose and dress of a fine gentleman in one of them but also assumed, in the famous Self-Portrait of 1500, a Christ-like pose (fig. 6). There are conflicting interpretations of this Until15 Dimru.s Nor»ir.its 1 plum mi pwpnjs fi-i UFm, Silui 111 eoloTIPUS i\U‘Us. '

anno x.xviii,

*Figure 6. Albrecht Diirer, Self Portrait at Twenty-Eight Years Old Wearing a Coat with Fur Collar (1500). Alte Pinakothek, Munich. Courtesy Giraudon/Art Resource, New York.*

Self-Portrait, with some seeing it in the religious tradition of the Imitation of Christ, others arguing that it makes an audacious claim for the painter as a divine creator (Koerner 1993). Important as the Italian and German self-portraits are in showing the beginnings of the claim to an exalted status for artisan/artist, we must remember that the majority of self-portraits of this type were done by a small elite know as “court artists.”

What art historians call court artists were those painters, sculptors, and architects who managed to separate themselves from the majority of their fellow artisan/artists by appointments to reigning princes and to elaborate a justification for their high status (Warnke 1993). Renaissance princes needed enormous numbers of artificers to adorn their palaces with the result that some painters and sculptors were raised from among the palace barbers and tailors to the rank of valet de chambre and a few even ennobled. These artisan/artists not only dressed the part of courtiers but also engaged in various fictions, such as not placing a price on their works—although they would accept an “honorarium”—in order to be worthy of associating with nobles who did not work for pay. But the most sought-after painters or sculptors like Leonardo, Michelangelo, Titian, and Diirer, whether or not they were on a princely payroll and ennobled, could move from city to city without having to pay membership fees in the local guild or follow its limitations on materials and prices. It is this handful of “purveyors to the courts” who have often been treated as the typical “Renaissance Artist.” In reality, even most court artists were given an annual salary, along with free board and room, and their employers expected them to paint portraits and decorate rooms or in some cases to paint furniture and guild caskets (Cosimo Tura), design tapestries and bowls (Mantegna), or do festivals and costumes (Leonardo). Unlike the modern artist, most of the court artists made their works on order for a specific function rather than creating them as a purely personal expression (Baxandall 1972; Burke 1986).

The genre of the “artist’s biography,” the development of the self-portrait, and the position of court artist were important steps toward the modern status and image of the artist. But to speak of Renaissance artisan/artists in general as “autonomous,” “sovereign,” or “absolute” is certainly an exaggeration. The Renaissance norm was cooperative production from workshops that fulfilled specific contracts for decorating churches, civic buildings, banners, wedding chests, and furniture. Even painters and sculptors who did not have permanent workshops often accepted joint commissions (Mantegna) or agreed to complete a half-finished sculpture (Michelangelo) with no sense that this was an offense to their “creative individuality.” The workshop, with associates and apprentices doing backgrounds, feet, torsos, and often whole panels, con-tinued to be typical from Raphael down through Rubens in the seventeenth century, and painters generally continued to work on decorative commissions along-side carvers, glassmakers, ceramists, and weavers (Cole 1983; Burke 1986; Welch 1997).

The situation of the architect was even more complex. Although early Renaissance buildings were still planned by master masons working from traditional pattern books, the building boom of the fifteenth century, combined with the enthusiasm for the remains of ancient Rome and the rediscovery of Vitruvius, led patrons to seek out painters and sculptors who were more likely to be familiar with the new style. Achievements such as Brunelleschi’s daring design for the dome of the Duomo in Florence raised the prestige of the architect as engineer/designer, and Alberti’s treatise and work claimed gentlemanly status for the architect as artist/intellectual. Yet, despite the claims of Alberti, Palladio, and Delorme for the ascendancy of architects over masons and carpenters, the latter were not treated as mere laborers carrying out orders but were often given considerable freedom to modify designs on the job.6

But the most striking evidence that the typical Renaissance painter, sculptor, or architect was not a modern individualist imposing claims to absolute autonomy are the many surviving contracts. Such contracts usually stipulated not only the size of the painting or statue, the price, and date of delivery but also the subject matter and materials. I have already mentioned the contract Leonardo signed in 1483. Many contracts gave even more detailed instructions, and a few Renaissance clients thought it appropriate to pay according to time and materials, and one even contracted for his frescos by the foot! This sort of attitude led to the famous incident in which Donatello, infuriated at a Genoan merchant who refused to pay the asked price for a bronze head because it hadn’t taken that long to finish, threw it into the street where it shattered, declaring that the merchant was more used to bargaining for beans than for bronzes. It’s a nice story that art writers have loved to repeat, but rather than illustrating an established “autonomy” of the artist in the modern sense it shows that the regulative assumptions during the Renaissance were quite different from ours. For every Leonardo whose hand was reputedly held at the moment of death by Francis I (Francis was out of town) or Titian whose dropped paint brush was supposedly picked up by Charles V (reprise of an ancient story), there were thousands of others whose workshops went on year after year faithfully executing the terms of their contracts (Kemp 1997; Welch 1997). Another area where some steps toward the modern separation of artist and artisan were taken merits special attention because of its gender implications—the changing status of the “needle arts,” especially embroidery. In the Middle Ages, as we have seen, not only were the needle arts the province of both men and women, but in addition, women worked in all the arts. Women were still active in almost every art during the Renaissance, including the newly prestigious arts of painting and sculpture, although most were the daughters of painters (Lavinia Fontana and Marietta Robusti) or worked within the convent setting (Catherina dei Virgi). One female painter even came from a noble background (Sofonisba Anguissola). We know little of Marietta Robusti because her father Jacopo (called Tintoretto) refused to let her marry or accept commissions on her own, keeping her as a valued member of his large workshop. Sofonisba Anguissola’s career, in contrast, is well documented since her father had her trained as a painter as part of a successful scheme to get her a court position—hence her many self-portraits that the father sent to various princes as gifts (fig. 7). Widely admired as a kind of “miracle”—a noblewoman who paints and paints well—she eventually became lady-in-waiting and painting instructor to the young Queen of Spain, and her stipend was regularly sent to her father (Chadwick 1996; Woods-Marsden 1998).

Despite the presence of these exceptional women, the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries saw the beginning of a general decline in the number of women in the higher status arts. Male-dominated guilds in most arts increasingly excluded women from full membership and obtained city ordinances forbidding independent work by women. As time went on, more and more arts of all kinds, including professional embroidery, were organized into guilds that excluded or restricted women. Apart from the unstated goal of eliminating economic competition, an indirect cause of the exclusion of women from higher forms of production was the beginning of the long transformation of the family from a work unit into the modern domestic household. Whereas medieval theories of sexual difference had seen women as the dangerous daughters of Eve, the Renaissance developed an ideology of sex role differences in which women’s primary function was child care and household management.

This sex role differentiation began to show up in the attitudes toward embroidery. In the early Renaissance when the respected painter Antonio Pollaiuolo and the embroiderer Paolo da Verona jointly produced a piece such as The Birth of John the Baptist, with its fine perspectival and shading effects, the difficulty of the embroidering technique was as challenging as the drawing; it would take several generations for professional embroidery to be seen as merely close and patient handwork. At the same time, Italian conduct manuals were already stressing the importance of embroidery in keeping the noblewoman’s idle hours occupied, thereby preserving chastity and enhancing femininity. Thus,

*Figure 7. Sofonisba Anguissola, Self Portrait (ca. 1555); oil on parchment, 8.2 X 6.3 centimeters. Emma F. Munroe Fund, 60.155. Courtesy Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Reproduced with permission. © 2000 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. All Rights Reserved.*

the Renaissance saw the beginning of a “process that not only divided embroidery from painting, but subdivided embroidery into a public ... and a domestic art” (Parker 1984, 81).

## The Ideal Qualities of the Artisan/Artist

The workshop, contract, and gender practices we have considered show that, despite important steps in the modern direction, the normative practices and concepts of the artisan/artist in the Renaissance were still far from modern ideals of the autonomous creator. This becomes even clearer when we look at the important changes in the ideal qualities desirable in artisan/artists. In the course of the fifteenth century, the accelerating spread of the knowledge of perspective and modeling, along with the revival of ancient models, lecjfto the conviction that painting and sculpture now required not only apprenticeship but also some knowledge of geometry, anatomy, and ancient mythology. Alberti and Leonardo projected an image of the artist as a “craftsman-scientist.” Such knowledge was crucial to “invention,” a term derived from classical rhetoric, which did not mean “creation” in the modern sense but the discovery, selection, and arrangement of content. Although some patrons proposed an “invention” of their own (or by a humanist scholar in their employ), a highly reputed painter, like Bellini, for example, might successfully dodge the attempt of an Isabella d’Este to have him use a drawing she sent as a guide to the composition of a painting she was ordering.

By the late sixteenth century this rather “scientific” sense of “invention” began to be supplemented by qualities more often associated with the idea of the poet such as “imagination,” “inspiration,” and “natural talent.” Talent or natural brilliance (ingegno) was said to show itself as grace, difficulty, facility, and inspiration. Grace was believed to result only when the painter’s or sculptor’s activity was not labored but flowed from natural ability. Yet the highest praise was reserved for those who set themselves tasks of the utmost technical difficulty, such as the unusual foreshortening of Michelangelo’s Jonah in the Sistine Chapel. When such feats of craftsmanship were brought off with ease and rapidity of execution, the painter was said to have facility. The remaining quality, inspiration (furia), was believed to fill a painter’s or sculptor’s imagination with images that facility could use to overcome difficulties and produce works touched by grace. As modern as this complex of concepts appears when looked back on through the veil of Romanticism, what makes these Renaissance ideas so unlike our “creative imagination” is that invention, inspiration, and grace were inseparable from skill and the imitation of nature for a particular purpose. And such imitations, for all the allowances to the painter’s fantasy and individual initiative, were still to be under the restraint of “decorum,” the rule of verisimilitude, and appropriateness. Similarly, Renaissance references to melancholy or personal idiosyncracies (much exaggerated in popular biographies) were not equivalent to modern ideas of bohemianism and rebellion.7

When Michelangelo mentioned in a letter of 1523 that Pope Julius II let him “do what I wished” in the Sistine Chapel, it did not mean “that he could paint whatever he wanted, rather ... that he could treat his theme in whatever manner he chose,” a theme in all likelihood agreed to in advance by his notoriously strong-willed patron (Summers 1981, 453). Renaissance painting and sculpture were not evaluated in their own time by modern standards of originality but by whether they gracefully overcame difficulties in invention and execution. Despite his pride in never keeping a workshop, Michelangelo’s practice and outlook were closer to that of his fellow artisan/artists than to that of the modern artist who places self-expression and originality above skill and service. If we feel uncomfortable calling Michelangelo an artisan /artist, it is because the older idea of the artisan/artist was definitively separated in the eighteenth century, reserving imagination, grace, and freedom to the artist-creator and leaving only skill, labor, and useful service to those called artisans. If the popular image of the “Renaissance Artist” distorts the career of Michelangelo, how much less does it fit the majority of painters, sculptors, and architects of the Renaissance?

## Shakespeare, Jonson, and the “Work”

Just as traditional textbooks and popular histories have often given us a onesided picture of the typical painter or sculptor of the Renaissance, so we have often been treated to a false idea of the Renaissance poet and of Shakespeare, in particular. Literary historians identify two main types of writers of poetry in Elizabethan England: “amateurs” and “professionals” (Auberlen 1984; Wall 1993)- The largest group, the amateurs, were the educated gentlemen and ladies who wrote for pleasure and circulated their poetry privately since print would bring an exposure unbecoming their station. John Donne, about to leave England on a diplomatic mission, asked a friend to keep a manuscript copy of his poems, declaring “I forbid it the Presse, and the Fire: publish it not, but yet burn it not; and between those, do what you will with it (Marotti 1986). Donne’s instructions nicely capture the nature of what is called coterie poetry, writings that circulated in manuscript among friends and associates who might make revisions or additions before sending them on but were not meant for print where they might be fingered over by anyone at the bookstalls. As a result “authorship tended to disappear,” and the poems often came to be “owned” as much by the social group as by the initial writer (Marotti 1991, 35). Among upper-class males, poetry was usually regarded as something to be indulged in during one’s youth or used in a quest for position and then given up. Deflating as it may be to our sense of the artist, a good deal of John Donne s poetry, like that of many other Elizabethans, was not produced because he wanted to make art but because he was looking for a job.

The type of Elizabethan writers that literary historians loosely call professionals were people who either sought or were forced to make a living by writing, usually combining support from patrons with the sale of manuscripts to printers. To make a living through patronage occasionally meant actual employment as secretary or tutor in a household but more often involved the use of obsequious dedications in an endless hustling of small gratuities. To make a living by selling manuscripts directly to printers was almost impossible due to the small size of the market for books and the absence of copyright. The only kind of writing that actually paid well enough to sustain a living for a few was the steady writing of plays for companies of actors.

After an initial try at living from patronage (he wrote a fawning dedication of Venus and Adonis to the Earl of Southampton), Shakespeare turned to writing exclusively for the theater. Sonnet in seems to allude to it:

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide, The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide Than public means which public manners breeds.

Thence comes it my name receives a brand.

(Lines 1—5) The “brand” Shakespeare’s name received from the public theater came from the low status of actors and plays. Elizabethan plays still had acrobats, musicians, gaudy costumes, dancing, and sword fights, and the theaters themselves were noisy, open air affairs where food was hawked and clowns might interrupt the action by engaging in repartee with the audience. Written for such a lively theatrical setting, Shakespeare’s plays were not fixed texts or “works of art” in our sense, but malleable scripts constantly revised for public performance (Loewenstein 1985; Patterson 1989).

Elizabethan plays were usually made on commission for theater companies who freely revised them for performance as long as they could get an audience, after which they might have them printed to make a few extra shillings. Most of Shakespeare’s plays that ended up in print were not prepared for publication by him but were either printed by his company, the Lord Chamberlain’s Men, or by pirates who wrote them down piecemeal from memory (Bentley 1971). Printed plays often mentioned the players on the cover and omitted the author’s name, as on the 1597 cover of Romeo and Juliet, which says: “As it hath been often (with great applause) plaid publiquely, by the right Honorable the L. of Hunsdon his Servants” (fig. 8). The usual procedure for getting a new play was for the company to commission a plot outline and then farm out different acts to several writers for completion; it is estimated that at least 50 percent of the

*Figure 8. William Shakespeare, cover of Romeo and Juliet (London, 1597). Courtesy Rare Book*

aK ■ and Special Collections, University of Illinois Library, Urbana-Champaign. Shakespeare’s name is EXCELLENT not mentioned, only the company and its patron.

conceited Tragedie OF Romeo and lulier* As it hath been often (with great applaufe)

plaid piibliquely» by the right Honourable the L.of H unjdon his Scruants.

LONDON, Printed by Iohn Danter* r\ M *7* extant Elizabethan plays were collaborative affairs, and Shakespeare himself engaged in several of them (Muir i960). Moreover, Shakespeare, as an actor-shareholder in the Lord Chamberlain’s Men, was not at complete liberty but clearly tailored his plays to the number of actors and variety of abilities in the company.8 And when the Lord’s Chamberlain’s Men became the King’s Men on the accession of James I, Shakespeare chose themes that would please the royal court (Kernan 1995).

The modern idea of the lone, autonomous artist seeking to create a fixed, original work of “art” is frustrated by this sixteenth -century practice of collaboration and of writing changeable scripts for performance rather than permanent “works.” Accordingly, historians of literature, like historians of painting, have developed a small scholarly industry devoted to the task of separating out the “hand of the Master” from that of supposedly lesser collaborators and trying to establish an authentic ur-text from the variety of competing performance records. Other modernizing assumptions about creativity and independence then come into play with the predictable result that Shakespeare is congratulated on his “subtle evolution ... toward artistic independence” or his plays are called “landmarks in the progress of the unfettered artist” (Rudnytsky 1991,154; and Edwards 1968, 84, respectively). So long as we remain in thrall to the assumptions of the modern system of art, we will think it a compliment to emphasize Shakespeare’s “unfettered” independence, whereas his actual achievement was to have crafted a series of magnificent dramas within the limits of a particular set of actors and the necessi ty of pleasing socially complex audiences in a volatile political atmosphere (Patterson 1989).

Although Donnes coterie amateurism and Shakespeare’s entrepreneurial professionalism typified the major alternatives for the poet’s self-conception, there were a few writers like Edmund Spenser and Ben Jonson who wanted a “higher” and more “serious” role for the poet and anticipated aspects of the modern ideal of the author/artist. Jonson, like Shakespeare, had acted in the theater, revised the plays of others, and accepted commissions for collaborative work. Yet unlike Shakespeare he not only turned his back on an active life in the theater to find support from aristocratic patrons, but he also constantly disparaged theatrical performance in comparison to written texts, wanting to recover the status of Horace and Virgil under Augustus. Richard Helgerson has called this ambition the “laureate” conception of the poet to distinguish it from the dominant “amateur” and “professional” modes (1983). Jonson promised to strip dramatic poetry of its theatrical “rags,” its songs, dances, and comic antics: there will be “no eggs broken, nor quaking custards,” he assures us in the prologue to Volpone and emphasizes that the entire play is “from his own hand” (Jonson [1605] 1978, 72, 75).

The primary instrument of Jonson’s campaign for “laureate” status, however, was the very thing amateurs like Donne (out of principle) and professionals like Shakespeare (out of necessity) denied themselves: print. Jonson was one of the few playwrights who consistently saw his own plays into print, insisting that they feature his name on the cover and adding notes in Latin to accentuate their character as texts for elite reading rather than popular perform-Figure 9. Benjamin Jonson, cover page of the Workes of Benjamin Jonson (London, 1616). Courtesy Rare Book and Special Collections, University of Illinois Library, Urbana-Champaign. The title page drawing of a grand piece of classical architecture and symbolic statuary, along with the Latin inscription, stresses Jonson’s learning and superiority to those who write either for pay or for diversion. THE WORKES mammjovjorL _nemo, me vf mirctuz , a fan: ^ lEg (ynteuha fauns xdcnbu.%. |*b| (7 LONDON^ Tinted , |{ 'IsJiffidm Stall!)'

ances. The apogee of Jonson’s use of the printed text against the malleable script was his unprecedented publication of his collected plays, masques, and epigrams as The Workes of Ben Jonson (1616) (fig. 9) in an expensive folio edition of the kind normally reserved for writings like Latin classics (Jonson 1616; Murray 1987; Wall 1993). Calling a collection of mere plays “works,” however, drew derisive comments from people like the gentleman amateur Sir John Suckling.

And he told them plainly he deserv’d the Bayes For his were call’d Works, where others were but Plaies.

(Spingarn 1968,1:90)

A brief look at the role of women writers in Renaissance England can help put Jonsons laureate ideal in a wider perspective. The most influential sixteenth-century conduct manual for women, Juan de Vives’s Instruction of a Christian Woman, underscored the belief that women had no place in public but should remain at home and keep silent. In this sort of atmosphere it is not surprising that few women were encouraged to write at all or few of those who did sought a “professional” career. Yet some aristocratic women like Mary Herbert, countess of Pembroke, or Lucy Russell, countess of Bedford, were not only patrons of writers but exchanged manuscript poetry with Donne, Spenser, and Jonson. But women who had their writings printed, and thus “exposed themselves” in public, were forced to engage in a variety of strategies of self-depreciation and self-justification, such as claiming a mothers obligation to provide a legacy of moral instruction for her children or to fulfill womens obligation to “redeem Eve” (Wall 1993).

Obviously, women writers’ motives and self-conceptions were even further removed from the “laureate” conception of Jonson than Donnes or Shakespeare’s. But even if we restrict ourselves to the handful of laureate writers like Jonson, we find they lacked crucial elements of the postromantic ideal of the artist, such as notions of genius and creative imagination. Jonson claimed that scholarship and hard work were a perfectly apt substitute for inspiration (Murray 1987). Contrary to the modern prejudice that radically separates the artists creativity from the craftspersons routine, the poetic craft in the Renaissance was learned “in the process of making, by innumerable examples, not by recipe and precept (Bradbrook 1969, 67). Many of the Elizabethan playwrights were in fact the sons of craftsmen/tradesmen: Spensers father was a clothmaker, Marlowe s a cobbler, Shakespeare’s a glover, Jonsons stepfather a bricklayer (Miller 1959). Shakespeare, the son, was also a craftsman whose “models might be recognized and judged in the playing by his audience, as well as the actors’ gild or fellowship (Bradbrook 1968, 140). Shakespeare plied his craft for pay, making shrewd investments first in his own company, then as a property owner and a moneylender and was eventually able to buy a coat of arms, giving him gentlemanly status, and to leave his family a solid estate on his death. He rejected both the coterie amateurism of a Donne and the laureate pretensions of a Jonson. Rather than thinking of him as a forerunner of the modern author/ artist, we might with equal justice think of him as a craftsman-entrepreneur who knew how to please an audience as he worked toward “a secure retirement at Stratford” (Schmidgall 1990, 97).

## A Proto-Aesthetic?

Just as the Renaissance did not have our category of fine art or our ideal of the autonomous artist, author, or composer, so it lacked the modern concept of the aesthetic as the contemplation of self-contained works. Architecture is, of course, by its very nature tied to utility, but in the Renaissance this was also true of music, poetry, and painting. Although there was a much more extensive development of secular music during the Renaissance, most music remained tied to texts and specific functions. As Vincenzo Galilei (Galileo s father) wrote, If a musician has not the power to direct the minds of his listeners to their benefit, his science and knowledge are to be reputed null and vain, since the art of music was instituted and numbered among the liberal arts for no other purpose (Strunk 1950, 319). Just as most music was written to accompany particular ceremonies or situations, most poetry, as we have seen, was also “occasional and the Horatian motto of “please and instruct” prevailed. Sir Phillip Sidney’s Defense of Poetry (1595) stressed the moral utility of poetry as able to teach by examples rather than mere precepts. Since most of us get our taste of Renaissance poetry out of anthologies or citations, we are seldom aware of the practical functions and political contexts of many individual poems. The typical modern anthology either omits the most obviously occasional poems or fails to note the original purpose of those it does include, producing an effect similar to seeing Renaissance panels from altars, wedding chests, or bedroom niches framed and hung as autonomous works in the museum.

Indeed, we are so used to viewing Renaissance paintings on the walls of museums or in book illustrations or slides that it takes some effort to remember that nearly everything now in our museums was originally made on commission and often designed to fit a specific location. It is particularly difficult in the museum setting to imagine the original context of the religious works that were “surrounded by screens, baldachins, flying angels and suspended ostrich eggs, candles and lamps” (Kempers 1992, n). In some of the smaller churches of Venice, like San Sebastiano, where Veronese did the ceiling, frieze, choir, chancel, and the doors and insets of the organ, it seems every inch is decorated, and nearly every chapel abounds in statuary, paintings, carving, inlays, fine candle-holders, monstrances, and reliquaries (fig. 10). Even the more secular works that are still on the walls or ceilings of Florentine or Venetian council chambers are seldom shown by our art books in their setting and framework; everything is cropped out but what we define as the “work.” But anyone who has visited the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence or the Doge’s Palace in Venice knows what a different sense and feeling these huge civic and religious paintings have in their ■‘i.i-Cw&'rVM £$g v! i'■ viliI ** if V^ ’’i imm ji i ^£•1 i Sr feud fSf ;fSw . 'IWa - Vi ■HP,' !

*Figure 10. Paolo Veronese, organ doors (Christ Healing at the Pool) and panel (Nativity) (1560). Church of San Sebastiano, Venice. Photograph by author.*

original setting. For those who lived in the Renaissance, the ornamented facades, frescos, panel paintings, carvings, statuary, tapestries, banners, fountains, fine furniture, and ceramics were not simply art to be looked at for itself but products of human skill and instruments of social, religious, and political life (Kemp 1997,163; Paoletti and Radke 1997; Welch 1997).

Evidence that paintings and sculptures were sometimes acquired or contemplated simply “for themselves” is of two kinds: the revival of collecting and the development of a vocabulary for the appreciation of the purely visual qualities of such works (Alsop 1982; Gombrich 1987). By the sixteenth century, there was a small body of connoisseurs who wanted not just a devotional or bedroom panel but a painting by the hand of a celebrated master like Titian, Raphael, or del Sarto. Yet the wealthy and powerful of the Renaissance had collections of all kinds, and often mixed objects we would call art with oddities of technology or natural history. Collecting was as much motivated by impulses of piety, prestige, and show as by pleasure in purely pictorial qualities (Burke 1986; Baxan-dall 1988). Yet Renaissance naturalism did invite the development of a vocabulary for discussing the artist’s success in capturing likeness as in Vasari’s striking account of a progression from the “correct but dry” painting of the early Renaissance to the “fluent and graceful” painting of the sixteenth century. There was a parallel progression in the writings of a variety or artists and connoisseurs, from fifteenth-century theories of correct imitation and beauty as ideal proportion (Alberti) to the more poetic notions of expressiveness and grace (Varchi). By the 1550s Venetians like Lodovico Dolche could stress the viewer’s pleasure and occasionally speak of “taste.” Yet even Michelangelo, who placed the highest value on such qualities as imagination, difficulty, and judgment of the eye, saw them as leading us toward the divine beauty. Insistence on the moral and spiritual function of painting and sculpture was a constant in treatises on painting from Alberti in the fifthteenth century to Lomazzo at the end of the sixteenth. The Renaissance had a “proto-aesthetic” in the restricted, generic meaning of a “judgment of sense,” but very few people took up the detached aesthetic attitude typical of the modern discourse of fine art (Summers 1987).

Despite the emergence of several characteristics that we associate with the modern fine art system, the dominant meaning of the terms “art” and “artist in the Renaissance remained distinctly premodern, and taste, when discussed, was not generally separated from function. The greatness of Michelangelo and Shakespeare was not that they separated art from craft but that they created their incomparable pieces while holding together imagination and technique, form and function, freedom and service. If one is not satisfied with enumerating precedents for the supposedly inevitable triumph of the modern ideas of art, artist, and aesthetic, these changes during the early modern peripd, important as they were, will betoken major steps in the direction of the modern system of art, not its arrival. Perhaps the strongest evidence that art had not been definitively separated from craft in the Renaissance is the fact that the status of the arts and of artisan/artists were still being debated throughout the seventeenth century. But the continued rise in the status of artisan/artists along with the increasingly important role played by painting, poetry, and music in the emerging absolutist monarchies helped make the seventeenth century an important period of transition to the modern fine art system.
