---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 1
chapter: 4
title: "Artemisia’s Allegory: Art in Transition"
source_pages: "57-74"
type: source
---

# Chapter 4: Artemisia’s Allegory: Art in Transition

Like many women painters of the seventeenth century, Artemisia Gen-tileschi was trained in her father’s workshop, as we learn from the trial of Augustino Tassi, who had been hired to teach her perspective and was charged with raping her. Although it is tempting to see her Judith Decapitating Holo-fernes as an expression of her feelings about Tassi, Artemisia s biblical commissions were equally important as female achievements in the male-dominated genre of narrative painting. Her Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting (ca.1630—40) is also important as an assertion of womens intellectual and technical equality as painters (fig. 11). To appreciate her self-portrait’s uniqueness, we need to understand Artemisia’s use of Cesar Ripa’s Iconology, a widely accepted handbook of symbols that specified that Pittura, or painting, should be personified as a woman wearing a gold chain with a pendant mask to stand for imitation, unruly locks of hair for inspiration, a colorful gown for skill, and a gagged mouth symbolizing the ancient saying that painting is “mute poetry.” What makes Artemisia’s self-portrait unique, as Mary Garrard points out, is that male painters could not use a self-portrait to personify painting since by established convention Pittura had to be a woman. Artemisia paints herself as Pittura, with the gold chain of imitation, the loose locks of inspiration, and the deftly colored shadows on her dress signifying technical skill. Of course, in a naturalistic self-portrait, the gag signifying “mute poetry” is absent, although it is hard not to imagine that this freeing of the female voice had an intentional significance. But most important of all Artemisia shows herself at an angle, leaning into her work, making it one of the most dynamic seventeenth-century self-portraits (Garrad 1989).

I have dwelt on Artemisia’s self-portrait because we can learn a great deal about the changing state of the old system of art by comparing her self-portrait to a much more famous one painted twenty years later by Velazquez. Although the monumental Las Meninas (1656) (fig. 12) has been frequently analyzed as a profound meditation on the nature of representation, it is also a self-portrait that asserts the nobility of the painter in the context of the rigidly hierarchical Figure n. Artemisia Gentileschi, Self Portrait as La Pittura (ca. 1630). Courtesy The Royal Collection, © 2000 Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.

*Figure 12 Diego Velazquez, Las Meninas or the Family of Phillip IV (1665). Museo del Prado, Madrid. Courtesy Erich Lessing/Art Resource, New York. The Infanta Margarita (accompanied by two maids of honor, a duenna, and two dwarfs) visits Velazquez in his studio. The two figures in the mirror on the back wall are believed to be the king and queen.*

court of Philip IV “where painters were assigned a low rank” (Brown 1986,264). Here the painter stands motionless in his fine clothes, the cross of the order of Santiago (sign of his ennoblement) on his chest, staring out at the king and queen who are honoring him with a visit; the Infanta and her entourage have been with him in the studio. Although he is holding his palette and brush, there is little in his demeanor or his surroundings to remind us that painting is an act of manual labor; on the contrary everything points to the elevated status of the court artist. Not so Artemisia; although finely dressed, she represents herself alone with her canvas, absorbed in her work, applying the brush in a vigorous movement. With her, mind and hand are one; artist and artisan are still united in a self-portrait that says “the worth of the art of painting derives neither from a precious temperament nor from theoretical pretensions, but from the simple business of the artist doing her work” (Garrard 1989, 361).

## The Artisan/Artist’s Continuing Struggle for Status

The contrast of these two self-portraits nicely reflects the transitional state of the old system of art in the seventeenth century when both the image of the artisan/artist and the category of art were changing, yet the values and practices of the old system still dominated. Although a few painters achieved a high standing—Velazquez as court painter, Bernini and Rubens through prestigious commissions from Popes and princes across Europe—most painters still remained tied to workshops and regional commissions. The most dramatic institutional gains in status for painters and painting occurred in France where the monarchy created the Academie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture in 1648. Although it is possible to treat the founding of the academy as simply another step in an inevitable liberation of art from craft, its creation at the time of the Fronde revolt of 1648-53 was also a political and economic riposte to the Paris Guild, which was trying to restrict the freedom of the king s painters at the very moment many French nobles were also in revolt. After the Fronde was defeated in 1653, the academy obtained an even more crushing set of privileges over the guild, yet the new regulations made no reference to economic and political advantages but portrayed the academy painters and sculptors as idealistically defending two arts, which ignorance has almost confused with lesser professions” (Pevsner 1940, 87). Yet the high status of the French academy painters came at the price of independence since they were essentially state functionaries.

In Italy where court painters had already achieved a high standing by the sixteenth century, the Roman painter Salvator Rosa is reputed to have told a client who came to him with some specific ideas for a painting, “go to a brick maker... they work to order” (Haskell 1980,22). Rosa was known for such outbursts, which show that 150 years after Donatello things had not changed much. Rosa sounds so familiar to us—yet he was completely untypical. Rosas claims to independence expressed “an image of the artist that was to be fully appreciated only by the romantics of the nineteenth century. In his own day he stood alone” (Haskell 1980, 23). The typical Italian painter or sculptor was still part of a workshop taking commissions.

In England and in the tiny Dutch Republic, we find painters even more closely tied to the workshop tradition. Most English painters continued to be guild members, decorating furniture and carriages and painting elaborate shop signs along with portraits, flowers, and animals. Most Dutch painters maintained a close professional and social alliance with goldsmiths, glassblowers, and embroiderers (Montias 1982). So little was painting seen as a high-flown spiritual vocation that painters like Meindert Hobbema or Judith Leyster did little or no painting after they came into money or began managing the family business. No doubt Dutch painters and sculptors were as concerned for their social status as anyone else, but they were concerned to distinguish themselves among artisans, not from them (Alpers 1983).

One of the most often noted characteristics of the Dutch artist’s situation in the seventeenth century was the emergence of an art market. Although patronage still existed, a large proportion of Dutch still lifes, landscapes, seascapes, and genre paintings were done in advance for sale in shops or weekly markets like other craft products (Montias 1982). Yet the Dutch painter working for the market was no more the modern individualist than was the typical French or Italian painter fulfilling contracts. There were exceptions, of course, such as Rembrandt, but he was as unusual in the Netherlands as Rosa was in Italy (Alpers 1988). Even the most celebrated and financially independent painters and sculptors of the seventeenth century, like Rubens or Bernini, relied on workshop assistants. Rubens turned out paintings in a regular factory atmosphere at Antwerp, where a visitor in 1621 described “many young painters ... working on different pieces that Rubens had sketched out in chalk and on which he had here and there added a spot of color” (Warnke 1980,165). Rubens even paid local specialists to put in landscape, animal, or flower segments, after which he would touch up the final version.

The difference in the pace at which Italian and French painters achieved a higher status and self-image vis-a-vis the English and Dutch painters stronger ties to the guild and workshop traditions was also true of architects. France s

*Figure 13. Claude Perrault, Louis Le Vau, and Charles Lebrun, east front of the Louvre (1667-74). Photograph by the author.*

Academie Royale d’Architecture (1671) grew in part out of the famous struggle of French architects like Le Vau, Le Brun, and Claude Perrault to wrest responsibility for the east facade of the Louvre (1667) from the Italian Bernini (fig. 13). But the significance of the academy went far beyond asserting the independence of French architecture. The academy took an important step in developing the modern figure of the architect by reversing previous methods of training through the workshop and apprenticeship. Students were now taught abstract principles of design before acquiring practical experience in the stone yards and on building sites. Of course, the architects of the Royal Academy were hardly trained to be autonomous artists but were, in actuality, loyal state functionaries (Rosenfeld 1977). England, in contrast, had notable individual designers, such as Inigo Jones and Christopher Wren, but also kept alive the tradition of the mason-architect and the gentleman-architect directing his own bricklayers and carpenters. As in the Renaissance, many architects like Wren gave some leeway to masons and carpenters to modify designs on the job (Wilton-Ely 1977).

The status and image of the poet also rose with the new social and political role assigned to poetry by the French and English monarchies. But to write for money still sullied one’s status, whereas to depend on patronage seriously limited the independence we think essential to the artist’s existence. Cyrano de Bergerac (the real one) wrote a juicy satire in favor of the Fronde revolt, attacking Cardinal Mazarin as an atheist and sodomite, only to have his princely patron switch sides, upon which Cyrano dutifully produced a withering Letter against the Frondeurs. Even in England, where there was still no copyright, few writers made a decent living from printers, and in France dramatic writers were notoriously less well off than the actors themselves. As La Bruyere’s line had it, “The actor, snuggled in his carriage, splashes mud in the face of Corneille who must walk” (Viala 1985, 95). Only Moliere, like Shakespeare, an actor with his own company, sometimes prospered at it. Aristocratic disdain and the precariousness of making a living led writers like Racine to give up what we would consider his true “literary” vocation as a playwright to become an official historiographer to the king. Boileau accepted a similar position, referring to it as the glorious activity that rescued me from the job of poetry” (Lough 1978,130).

If the seventeenth-century situation of the poet lacked the autonomy characteristic of the modern idea of the author /artist, it did include many of the modern gender prejudices. Timothy Reiss has suggested that the modern idea of literature as it began to emerge in the late seventeenth century was male gendered from the beginning (1992). In the early seventeenth century, even aristocratic women ran afoul of gender stereotypes. Lord Denny attacked Lady Mary Wroth for her romance, The Countess of Montgomeries’ Urania (1621), calling her a “hermaphrodite in show, in deed a monster” and abjured her to “leave idle books alone / For wiser and worthyer women have writte none” (Miller and Waller 1991, 6) (fig. 14). Later in the century some male writers argued that if women did write, they should not attempt epic or tragedy but should stick to “female” genres, such as letter writing or the romance. For Boileau and La Bruyere women were especially equipped to write popular novels because of a supposed female tendency to emotionalism and fixation on matters of intimacy. A few male writers, however, celebrated women’s “soundness of discernment for fine and delicate things” (Perrault 197L 3L 38)- Reiss sums up the dominant seventeenth-century position: “Ideal consumers of high culture, admitted producers of subordinate cultural artifacts (short novels, fairy tales, letters), women now had their role essentially set for a long time to come (1992,217).

Women’s position as consumers of high culture and producers of low can clearly be seen in the role the needle arts played in seventeenth-century debates over womens’ place in society. The identification of amateur embroidery as a special province of women’s expression that began in the Renaissance became

*Figure 14. Title page,*

*[symbol/figure content not captured in text extraction]*

The balloon at the top stresses Lady Mary’s pedigree as daughter of the Earl of Leicester and niece of Sir Phillip Sidney, the poet.

*[symbol/figure content not captured in text extraction]*

'(innfrJJbrlaHMimiO'm.

Wl/ullcwr &RIMUXD „ hid , jtrt tt> bcejettld at dicircfhonr . ^jicj w St Huns bans ChunjEfc jfc\iiyandinJPUcJtt'ett and in, y jk y?ta 'aJtiy at fjync of y :A jJj|C. v. . ‘'•sure ,4, -- ,+Sjm ' J^c pajaajjh/ipTJ USafciv/m even more pronounced in the seventeenth century, and education for noble and middle-class women almost always included embroidery alongside singing, dancing, and the rudiments of reading. The contrast of the needle and the pen would endure through the eighteenth century, and some women saw the hours spent in amateur embroidery as a major impediment to intellectual development. The poet Anne Finch, Countess of Winchilsea, put it bluntly:

I am obnoxious to each carping tongue Who says my hand a needle better fits.

(Parker 1984,105) Despite these handicaps, increasing numbers of women published novels in both France and England and a few, like Aphra Behn, made a living writing for the theater during the Restoration. But many women who published still felt they must apologize for it.

As for musicians, composing and performing for pay remained lower-status jobs compared to the liberal arts of scholarly speculation on music theory or of aristocrats playing for diversion. Most musicians were even more dependent than the majority of painters and writers, employed by churches, towns, and aristocratic courts under contracts that specified their duties of composition, playing, education, and maintenance of instruments. Several monarchs and a few grand nobles had their own stable of court musicians, among whom a director, like Lully under Louis XIV, might achieve considerable prestige, yet in general court composer/players were simply part of the vast array of palace servants. Musical scores belonged to those who commissioned them or, if published, to the printer who purchased them since there was no copyright (Raynor 1988).

## The Image of the Artisan/Artist

When we turn from the social situation of artisan/artists to the image or ideal qualities desired, we find that the term “artist” could still be applied to anyone who practiced “an art,” but more especially to alchemists. Examples of typical “artists” in Furetiere’s 1690 French dictionary (1968) were not Raphael or Corneille, but the alchemists Raymond Lull and Paracelsus!1 We also find little trace of the occasional Renaissance image of the unconventional melancholic whose bizarre actions, driven by the vapors, are to be tolerated as a sign of natural talent (ingeniutn). This was particularly true of manual arts, such as painting and sculpture, whose most famous seventeenth-century practitioners Rubens, Velazquez, or Bernini, for instance—all wished to be viewed as superior gentlemen (including Caravaggio, who killed two men in knife fights). Although poets did not have to overcome the stain of manual labor, most were as desirous as painters of achieving at least minor noble status. Once Racine was made historiographer to the king, for example, he quickly learned to play his proper role at court, earning the supreme compliment from the Due de Saint-Simon: there was “nothing of the poet in his dealings, but everything of the gentleman” (Lough 1978,126).

The key elements of the Renaissance image of the artisan/artist remained in force: facility, talent, enthusiasm, imagination, and invention. Yet here too the seventeenth century was a time of transition, especially in the concepts of talent (ingegno) and genius (genius). The two Latin terms behind our word “genius” had quite different meanings: genius (a guardian spirit, “genie”) and in-genium (natural talent). The dominant term, ingenium, or innate ^talent, was usually translated esprit in French and “wit” in English, words that had an important career in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philosophy and literature. In the course of the seventeenth century, however, the term “genius” in English and French came to cover a blend of both its mythological meaning and the meaning of natural talent or wit. The cliche that the good poet needed both rules and talent or wit (ingenium) could now be expressed as a need for rules and genius. Like genius, the idea of “enthusiasm” or “inspiration” was also further secularized. The lingering supernatural associations deriving from biblical models or the Platonic tradition were largely eliminated. The skeptical Hobbes ridiculed the invocation of external spirits, saying he could not understand why a man “enabled to speak wisely from the principles of nature ... loves rather to be thought to speak by inspiration, like a Bagpipe” (Spingarn 1968, 2:59). Yet even when genius and inspiration were declared indispensable by seventeenth-century writers, they were not placed above reason and judgment but in coordination with them (Becq 1994a).

In the seventeenth century, the notion of imagination in the arts had none of today’s elevated connotations. Quite the contrary. As a general faculty of the mind, the imagination was still either treated as a receptive storehouse of sensory traces or given a workaday mediating role between body and mind. But when the imagination was not performing its normal image-retention functions and turned to invention or fantasy, thinkers as varied as Hobbes, Descartes, and Pascal declared it liable to fanaticism, madness, or illusion. According to England’s poet laureate, John Dryden, “imagination in a poet is a faculty so wild and lawless, that like a high-ranging spaniel, it must have clogs tied to it, lest it outrun the judgment” (Dryden 1961, 8).2

The notion of invention, derived from rhetoric, also lacked the crucial modern elements of originality and subjectivity that later turned invention into “creation.” Given the central place of imitation in seventeenth-century art theory, poets, painters, and composers were not viewed as “creating” beauty but as discovering what was already there. Only the ignorant, Boileau wrote, would think that having a new thought was a matter of having an idea that no one ever had before; on the contrary, “it is a thought that ought to come to everyone and which someone happened to be the first to express” (Ferry 1990, 54). Andre Felibien and Roger de Piles took a similar position on invention in painting, viewing the painter’s work as an inventive imitation of nature not an imaginative creation in the modern sense (Becq 1994a). Thus, although the status and image of painters, poets, and musicians continued to improve, it still remained far from the modern postromantic ideal of the artist.

## Steps toward the Category of Fine Art

If the idea of the artisan/artist was still in transition toward its modern meaning, the same was true of the category of art itself. “Art” still had the older, more inclusive meaning of “an art,” and the old scheme of liberal versus mechanical arts was still widely used even if it was increasingly inadequate to the changing conceptions and relations among the various disciplines, especially the sciences. The term “science” itself was still used for knowledge in general, although our more restricted meaning of science (physics, chemistry, biology, etc.) was beginning to emerge. Even then, the group of disciplines we call natural science” was often referred to as “natural philosophy.” Certainly, the division of knowledge into the sciences, fine arts, and humanities that seems so natural to us was not yet established, although it was approximated by a few individual thinkers. Francis Bacon’s tree of knowledge, based on the three faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, placed history under memory, philosophy under reason, and poetry under imagination. Yet Bacon had no category of fine art that joined poetry, painting, and music under a single head. His former assistant, Thomas Hobbes, created a table of knowledge that put poetry, mineralogy, optics, music, ethics, and rhetoric together in the same subdivision under “civil philosophy,” whereas it has architecture with navigation and astronomy under “natural philosophy” (Hobbes [1651] 1955, 54-55)- Most other seventeenth-century classifications were equally far from our modern conception of the fine arts (Kristeller 1990). Yet even if there was no settled category of fine arts in the seventeenth century, there were some important transitional steps toward it within the individual arts of painting, music, and literature.

Painting and sculpture had already achieved something like liberal arts status in Florence with the creation of the Academy of Design in 1563, and the Pope had granted members of the Roman Academy of St. Fuke liberal status in 1600. The creation of the French academy in 1648 clearly elevated painting’s cultural prestige in France, although in Spain it took until 1677 for painters to attain a tax-free liberal ranking for their profession. Elsewhere (Portugal, England, the Dutch Republic), it was necessary to fight for the liberal arts status of painting down into the eighteenth century (Da Costa [1696] 1967; Pears 1988). French advocates of the intellectual worth of painting, such as Charles Du Fresnoy, continued to stress the similarity of painting to poetry, whereas the lay president of the Roman academy of painting, Giovanni Bellori, emphasized the high spiritual aspirations of painting through his vigorous reaffirmation of the notion that painting represents ideal beauty.

Music theory had been one of the liberal arts since antiquity, ajid musical practice (playing) and poetics (composing) had risen in status from the late Middle Ages onward as music became an increasingly important element of court ritual and entertainment. But an even more significant change in the conception of music occurred in the course of the seventeenth century. The older polyphonic ideal of music as a harmony based on mathematical ratios and the concord of the spheres began to be challenged by a new ideal of a monodic music (melody with accompaniment) that could more adequately represent human feelings, an idea already found in Vincenzo Galilei’s Dialogue on Ancient and Modem Music of 1581. Galilei had argued in good Renaissance humanist fashion that composers should return to the practice of the ancients, who subordinated music to the ideas and feelings expressed in the text. The growing acceptance of the ideal of representing feelings led from madrigals written as voiced melody with instrumental accompaniment to the beginnings of opera around 1600. The first operas in Florence were a sober attempt to revive Greek tragedy, but as opera moved from the princely courts and aristocratic palaces to public theaters, first in Venice, later in northern capitals, it increasingly became an elaborate entertainment spectacle subordinating written scores to virtuoso arias and scenic effects. The older polyphonic style did not go away but tended to retreat into church music, although even there the Reformation and Counter Reformation churches encouraged a music that served texts.

This new emphasis on the representational and expressive aspects of music made an important contribution to reshaping the classification of the arts. In the running debate between adherents of the old polyphony and the proponents of the new melodic expressiveness, the polyphonists continued to stress music’s relation to mathematics and astronomy within the liberal arts quadriv-ium, whereas the expressivists tended to draw analogies between music and rhetoric or poetry within the trivium. By moving music closer to rhetoric and poetry, the newer melodic and representational trend helped weaken the ties within the quadrivium and foreshadowed the later grouping of poetry, rhetoric, and music with painting sculpture and architecture that would be called the fine arts.

There were also some important seventeenth-century steps toward the modern category of literature (imaginative poetry, drama, fiction) that helped prepare the way for the emergence of the category of fine art. Cardinal Richelieu’s creation of the Academie Franchise (1635) with the charge to purify the French language and Charles II’s restoration of the theaters and naming of John Dryden as England’s poet laureate were recognitions of poetry’s serious status as contributor to political stability and monarchic glory. No one better summed up the seventeenth-century union of the political, ethical, and artistic than the noted classicist Anne Dacier: “Belles-lettres are the source of good taste, good manners and all good government” (Reiss 1992, 37). Yet terms like “belles let-tres,” “poetry,” and “literature” were still not fixed in their modern sense, and “literature” continued to be used primarily to mean book learning in general. Late in the century, however, an additional meaning began to attach to the term “literature,” as reflected in Pierre Richelet’s Dictionnaire frangois of 1680, which defined it as “knowledge of belles-lettres,” or the work of “Orators, Poets and Historians” (Reiss 1992, 231). Even so, Antoine Furetiere, compiler of a competing dictionary a few years later, said of the term “belles lettres (no doubt with Richelet in mind): “People call humane letters, or erroneously belles-lettres, the knowledge of poets and orators, whereas true Belles-Lettres are physics, geometry and the solid sciences” (Viala 1985, 282).

As Marc Fumaroli has shown, these conflicting attitudes toward the terms “belles lettres” and “literature” reflected their marginal status compared to the continuing prestige of eloquence and rhetorical theory. Age of Eloquence, age of rhetoric, the seventeenth century saw the birth of Belles-Lettres: it is not yet the age of Literature.... The Literary only becomes perceptible after the fact, in the revealing and deforming light of a later stage of culture (Fumaroli 1980, 31-32). Although Fumaroli emphasizes the difference between late seventeenth-century practices and modern ideas, and Timothy Reiss focuses on the similarities, the two positions are not incompatible. Erica Harth has argued that although a separate realm of literature was not fully established, changes in both the novel and travel writing show that the old category of literature was beginning to divide into more or less distinct realms of truthful fictions (poetry, novel, drama) and “truthful facts” (travel, mechanics, zoology), a division that Douglas Patey and Alvin Kernan see as complete only a full century later (Harth 1983; Patey 1988; Kernan 1990). Even more important than linguistic signs of the beginning of the modern idea of literature is evidence of a nascent literary public and vernacular criticism in the 1680s, especially in France. Prior to 1678 most literary debate in France took place among a small Parisian aristocracy and upper bourgeoisie, and what few journals existed were either political or highly academic. But in 1678, the monthly Le mercure gallant began to add excerpts and reviews of current novels, especially the controversial La princesse de Cleves by Madame de La Fayette. Her novel was controversial, at least, after the editor of Le mercure gallant invited his readers to form discussion groups and send in letters summarizing their reaction to it, thus treating his lay “public” as if their individual opinions mattered (Dejean 1997). The eventual expansion of this embryonic public for literature in the eighteenth century, combined with the emergence of similar publics for music and the visual arts, would play a key role in establishing the modern system of fine arts.

Although a category of literature was beginning to emerge in the late seventeenth century and many people were beginning to associate music with rhetoric and poetry, and although painting, sculpture, and architecture were widely accepted as liberal arts, the modern category of fine art still did not appear. Before it could emerge, the old liberal arts-versus-mechanical arts scheme itself had to be broken apart and reorganized. That began to happen through two other seventeenth-century developments: the increasing recognition of the sciences as a distinct realm of knowledge and practice and a transformation in the understanding of rhetoric that reduced it from a mode of practical knowledge and persuasive reasoning to a matter of style and ornament.

The founding of the Royal Society in London (1660) and the Academie Royale des Sciences in France (1663) were only the most visible signs of the institutionalization of science as a distinct realm of activity (Briggs 1991; Shapin 1996). Whereas many twentieth-century art historians have stressed the liberation of the individual artist from the workshops and guilds, some historians of science have stressed the cooperation of scientists with the workshops. The importance of the mechanical arts to the rise of science was not simply that they provided Galileo with a telescope; they also offered scientists a model of knowledge based on experience and collaborative effort (Rossi 1970). Of course, Galileo’s insistence on mathematics as a key to a mechanical understanding of nature was as important as his emphasis on physical experiments. By joining the experimental and mathematical methods, seventeenth-century scientists not only laid the basis for the sciences to achieve an autonomous identity but also drove a wedge into the liberal arts, pushing geometry and astronomy toward disciplines like mechanics and physiology that seemed more appropriate company than music, which was itself moving toward rhetoric and poetry.

A parallel threat to the coherence of the liberal arts system in the seventeenth century came from changes in the conception of rhetoric, especially Descartes’s rigorous separation of logic, as a “geometric” method of reasoning leading to certainty, from rhetoric, the “art” of reasoning toward the probable. Although “rhetoric” is a pejorative term today, from Aristotle and Cicero down through Montaigne and Erasmus, rhetoric, as the art of persuasion, had given fairly equal place to each of its three components: invention (developing arguments), disposition (ordering arguments), and eloquence (style and delivery). In the seventeenth century, Descartes’s pursuit of certainty reinforced Petrus Ramus’s earlier claim that invention and disposition should be transferred from rhetoric to logic and that rhetoric should henceforth concern itself only with style and delivery. One effect of Cartesianism was to hasten the breakup of the old liberal arts trivium that had grouped grammar and rhetoric with logic by pushing a rhetoric reduced to style even closer to poetry and by associating logic with geometry and the physical sciences.

Although all the elements for the emergence of the category of fine art were in place by the 1690s, such a reorganization of categories did not occur for another fifty years. Even at the end of the seventeenth century, for example, many people still associated music with mathematics and astronomy rather than with rhetoric and poetry; the English scholar William Wotton even called music a “physico-mathematical science” (Wotton [1694] 1968, 284). And although painting, sculpture, and architecture were often grouped together using names like “arts of design,” “figurative arts,” even “beaux-arts,” no single name or concept became dominant even for the visual arts as a group (Brunot 1966). Horace’s dictum linking poetry and painting was a commonplace, as were vague invocations of the “sister arts,” but most of the new groupings of the arts were passing remarks, never worked out in any consistent fashion, let alone generally accepted.3 A vivid example of the uncertainty about the new ways of classifying the arts is Charles Perrault’s 1690 essay describing a nobleman’s collection of eight allegorical paintings of the liberal arts. Perrault suggested that these eight arts should really be called “beaux arts” since they were “worthy of being admired and cultivated by a gentleman and marked by taste and genius,” comments that make his idea of beaux arts sound remarkably like the modern category of fine art (Kristeller 1990* t-95)* but the arts depicted in the paintings included not only poetry, oratory, music, architecture, painting, and sculpture but also optics and mechanics. Perrault’s mixture of what we would radically separate as art and science nicely exemplifies the transitional state of classifications at the end of the seventeenth century. It was to be another fifty years before the modern category of fine art was worked out in a way that gained general assent and became regulative for subsequent generations, a story we will pick up at the beginning of the next chapter.

## The Role of Taste

If seventeenth-century classifications of the arts were still in transition toward our modern categories, so were notions of how we should respond to the arts. Poetry, painting, music, and other arts were still seen as serving useful functions such as instruction, prestige, accompaniment, decoration, and diversion, whereas the number of people who began to appreciate painting or sculpture “for its own sake” were a tiny elite. Even in Italy, where “a body of connoisseurs was coming into being prepared to judge pictures on their aesthetic merits,” such an attitude was one “that only generally becomes apparent in the eighteenth century” (Haskell 1980,130).

A telling indicator of the continuing functionalism of the arts was the absence of institutions like the art museum, the secular concert, or copyright, which today help set works of art apart from other cultural artifacts. Yet one can identify some predecessors of these institutions. The beginnings of the secular concert have been traced to amateur musical groups such as the German collegium musicum and to the occasional concerts offered in London taverns from the 1660s on. Forerunners of the art museum, of course, were the large princely collections of paintings or sculpture, although most were closed to all but a few artists or connoisseurs on invitation. The other precursor of the art museum was the “cabinet of curiosities,” studiolo, or Kunstkammer, a specially designed building or room in a princely palace for exhibiting clocks, scientific instruments, rare plants, and minerals alongside paintings, sculptures, and precious jewels. These assemblages were conceived on an encyclopedic principle reflecting the humanist ideal of knowledge, and the inclusion of painting and sculpture in them is one more sign that there was not yet a separate category of fine art (Hooper-Greenhill 1992; Bredekamp 1995). Of course, two other major art institutions already existed by the seventeenth century: the theater, which went back to the late Middle Ages, and the opera, which came into being at the beginning of the century. As the opera moved from its function as court diversion into public theaters, it became an entertainment medium for the well-off, in which the libretto was increasingly subordinated to virtuoso arias, orchestral interludes, ballets, and spectacular scenic effects.

Although the arts were still regarded primarily in terms of purpose in the seventeenth century, there is also evidence of an increased emphasis on the role of taste. The metaphorical use of “taste” goes as far back as the Hebrew Scriptures, and we have noted its application to Renaissance painting by a few Italian connoisseurs. In the seventeenth century, “taste” was even more extensively used for the ability to make discriminating choices in social life and the arts (Barnouw 1993).4 Debates over taste in the arts centered around a generalized classicism, the belief in following ancient models and ideals shared by leading Italian (Giovanni Bellori), French (Nicolas Boileau), and English (John Dryden) writers whose views on poetry and painting remained a powerful force through much of the eighteenth century. The core beliefs of classicism were that paint-ing, poetry, and music are arts of imitation, for which the object is the beautiful in nature, the means is reason, and the end is to instruct through pleasure.5

Love reason then; that whate’er you write Borrow always from her its prize and light.

(Boileau 1972, 47) During the last half of the century, there was a growing resistance to these classicist positions in the name of feeling, individual judgment, and modern genres such as the novel. It was frequently said that members of the public, who knew little of the rules of art, might still make a correct response to theater or painting through feeling (Piles 1708, 94; Reiss 1992, 92). Yet these champions of feeling were not so much antireason as they were trying to enlarge the scope of reason itself (Becq 1994a). The idea of feeling was in its own way as broad and complex as the idea of reason, changing gradually in the course of the century from the notions of passion and emotion (Descartes’s treatise on the emotions) to tenderness (Madelaine de Scudery’s famous “map” of the feelings), and culminating in the idea of sentiment, which became so important in the eighteenth century (Dejean 1997). “Sentiment” covered a territory ranging from the sentimental all the way up to a notion of tacit knowledge or spiritual intuition. Earlier in the century, Pascal had already claimed that the heart has its reasons the reason knows not,” for it reasons “tacitly, naturally and without art” (Pascal 1958,73). Among late seventeenth-century writers, Dominique Bouhours is best known for insisting on the role of feeling in our spontaneous response to social situations and poetic works, using the cliche, je ne sais quoi (I know not what) (Bouhours 1920). Most of Bouhours examples of theje ne sais quoi were not taken from the arts but from the social realm, such as the way we recognize a face, detect a fever, or find another person noble or lovable. Yet, so little was Bouhours an anti-intellectualist that he spoke of theje ne sais quoi experience as itself a kind of “rapid reason” (200). Bouhours and the others who emphasized grace, heart, delicacy, and feeling were suggesting that there might be a third way of responding to poetry, painting, or music between discursive reason and pure sensory enjoyment.

This attempt to combine reason with feeling also had important gender implications. Although Perrault and others admired women as both writers and judges of literature, for a philosopher like Malebranche it was the same emotional sensitivity that made women unfit to produce serious poetry that enabled them to appreciate its sentiments (Malebranche 1970, 266). Yet if some writers were willing to make women natural arbiters of taste, for still others, women’s inconstant reason limited them to an appreciation of the merely ornamental and sentimental aspect of the arts. It is perhaps no accident that oneonale writer dismissed Bouhours as a ridiculous precieuse who had spent too much time with “women and minor teachers,” whereas Madame de Sevigne found Bouhours a man of many-faceted intelligence (Ferry 1990, 54).

In attempting to enlarge the idea of reason, the partisans of feeling and visual immediacy took an important step toward the modern idea of the aesthetic, but few offered a theoretical elaboration of their position. The major thinker besides Pascal to formulate the philosophical implications of the cognitive role of feeling or rapid reason was Leibniz. Whereas Descartes had spoken of the discovery of “clear and distinct” ideas as the guarantee of certainty, Leibniz argued that there are ideas that are clear and yet not distinct; that is, we clearly perceive them but cannot distinctly separate them into parts for analysis. Such ideas are “fused” or compact, like the perception of red, the taste of a lemon, or the sound of a chord.

Rather than thinking of each musical note distinctly, we grasp harmony and melody all at once in a fused way (Leibniz 1969, 291; Barnouw 1993). Similarly, “we sometimes know clearly, without the slightest doubt, that a poem or a picture is well or badly done, because there is in it an I know not what which satisfies or shocks us” (Leibniz 1951, 325). Yet Leibniz did not limit tacit knowing or the je ne sais quoi to the arts any more than Bouhours had. Before ideas like those of Bouhour’s and Leibniz s could lead to the modern idea of the aesthetic, the fine arts would have to be separated from both the crafts and the sciences and reconceived as an autonomous category requiring a distinct faculty of judgment. The late seventeenth century remained in these respects, as in so many others, a transitional period.
