---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 2
chapter: 7
title: "From Taste to the Aesthetic"
source_pages: "130-151"
type: source
---

# Chapter 7: From Taste to the Aesthetic

On may i, 1778, Mozart wrote his father about a salon concert he gave at the duchesse de Chabot’s in Paris: “Madame and her gentlemen never interrupted their drawing for a moment... so that I had to play to chairs, tables and walls” (Johnson 1995, 76). Even when the music was not intended as background for other activities, salon audiences were seldom very attentive (fig. 35). If people didn’t listen in the salons, the situation was no better in the opera houses, where the aristocrats who sat on the stage and the mixed company that stood in the pit talked, blew whistles, threw apples, or started fights. At the Paris Opera, the rowdiness was such that forty soldiers carrying muskets were assigned to patrol the halls. Orchestra conductors tried to keep time above the noise by beating a wooden stick against the podium, scene changes took place in full view, and the hall was brightly lit by thousands of candles that maximized the spectator’s view of each other, although the smoke sometimes obscured the stage. Even the physical layout favored socializing over listening because the boxes along the sides of the second and third levels were deep and had floor to ceiling walls set at right angles rather than slanting toward the stage, making it easier to carry out liaisons or to see people across the way than to attend to the actors on the stage (Johnson 1995,10) (fig. 36). The situation was no better in London. Hogarth’s painting of a climactic scene in the Beggar’s Opera of 1728 humorously exploits the fact that some of the aristocracy sat on stage by having Lavinia Fenton, playing Polly, look past the other actors toward her lover, the duke of Bolton at a table along the side (Paulson 1991-93, vol. 1) (fig. 37).

In 1759 the French eliminated stage seating, and the English followed in 1762; later in the century the walls of boxes in new theaters were slanted toward the stage and fixed seats were installed in the pit, although this did not quiet audiences as much as hoped (Rougement 1988). The removal of aristocrats from the stage not only signaled an attempt to eliminate distraction but also swept away one of the last vestiges of the social/ritual aspect of the theater. Serious operas and plays were now supposed to be the experience of an art illusion, and theater audiences began to be encouraged to sit in respectful and attentive silence

*Figure 35. Augustin de Saint Aubain, Le Concert a Madame la Comtesse de Saint Brisson (n.d.). Courtesy Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.*

(Caplan 1989). It would take until the mid-nineteenth century for the new behavior to become typical; meanwhile, the physical changes and the exhortations to silent attention helped prepare the way for theories of the aesthetic.1

This is not the place to trace the history of particular theories of the aesthetic since Alexander Baumgarten first coined the term in 1735; instead I will describe some signs of a split in the traditional responses to the arts that divided the satisfactions of utility and diversion from the special kind of pleasure that came to be called aesthetic. The crucial difference between taste and the aesthetic is that taste has always been an irremediably social concept, concerned as much with food, dress, and manners as with the beauty or meaning of nature or art. From the ancient Greeks through the nineteenth century, literal taste, as facilitated by the tongue, as well as the senses of touch and smell, were downgraded as too sensual and bodily compared to vision and hearing (Korsmeyer 1999)- In the eighteenth century, for example, Lord Karnes begins his influential discussion of taste by distinguishing the dignified and “elevated” senses of sight and

*Figure 36. Jean Michel*

Moreau le Jeune, La PetitLoge (1777). Two gentlemen receive a dancer in their box at the Paris Opera.

Courtesy Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. hearing from the “inferior” bodily senses of tasting, touching, and smelling (Karnes 1762,1-6). Most of those who contributed to the theory of taste in the eighteenth century similarly tried to separate taste in the fine arts from the word’s natural association with ordinary sensual pleasures or the satisfactions of utility. The advantage of the new term “aesthetic” was that it did not carry such metaphorical baggage. But before examining the intellectual process by which taste was transformed into the aesthetic, we need to consider the emergence of certain “aesthetic” behaviors—like the calmer attention aimed at by eliminating aristocrats from the stage or by installing seats in the pit.

*Figure 37. William Hogarth, The Beggar’s Opera, III (1729). Courtesy Yale Center for British Art, Paul Mellon Collection, New Haven, Conn.*

## Learning Aesthetic Behavior

A particularly telling example of this new kind of behavior was the “picturesque tour” so popular in Britain during the last third of the century. To experience a landscape as “picturesque” was to look at it in the way one looked at a painting. This purely visual attitude seems so natural to us that it is easy to overlook the change from a moral and utilitarian to an aesthetic behavior. Early eighteenth-century estate grounds were often laid out with quiet vales for meditation and adorned with exemplary statuary and structures such as Stowe garden’s neoclassical “Temple of Virtue,” conceived after the old Horatian ideal for poetry: “The End and Design of a good Garden is to be both profitable and delightful” (Andrews 1989, 52). By mid-century, however, many newer designs eliminated exemplary statuary and laid out estates to provide a gallery of landscape views solely to please the eye.

According to William Gilpin’s influential guidebooks on the picturesque, regular fields and well-built houses might give us moral satisfaction, but they excite no “pleasure in the Imagination” (Andrews 1989, 48). Appreciating picturesque beauty meant attending to the purely visual factors of lighting, distances, rough contours, and ruins (Gilpin 1782). Moreover, only certain kinds of people could appear in a genuinely picturesque scene without spoiling the effect: “Milk-maids . . . ploughmen, reapers, and all peasants engaged in their several professions, we disallow ... they are valued, for what in real life they are despised—loitering idly about” (Bohls 1995, 96). Coached by writers like Gilpin to eliminate moral and utilitarian interests in favor of purely pictorial ones, the new domestic tourists set off for the river Wye and other sites armed with guidebooks, sketchpads, journals, and a most telling piece of aesthetic equipment: the “Claude glass,” a dark tinted, convex mirror that conveniently reduced a scene to the scale and tonality of a miniature Claude Lorrain painting (fig. 38). Today, we are likely to sympathize with Jane Austen’s parody of the picturesque tourist in Northanger Abbey where Catherine Morland looks down from the top of Beechen Cliff and rejects “the whole city of Bath, as unworthy to make part of a landscape” (Austen 1995, 99). However banal it now seems, picturesque tourism, with its Claude glasses, guidebooks, and journals, was an important step toward the behavior we call aesthetic.

*Figure 38. William Gilpin, sketch from Observations on the River Wye (1782). Courtesy Rare Book and Special Collections, University of Illinois Library, Urbana-Champaign.*

The rapid growth in the number of readers for poetry and the novel also led to attempts at shaping appropriate attitudes, beginning with Addison’s series titled “Pleasures of the Imagination” in the Spectator. In chapter 4, we noted the beginning of a literary exchange in the French journal, Le mercure gallant, from the 1680s on (fig. 39). In Germany, the burgeoning market for secular literature in the late eighteenth century led to a vigorous public discussion in which pastors and officials were alarmed about morals and political stability, while Fichte, Goethe, and Schiller complained of the taste for sentimentalism and cheap thrillers. The new literary criticism not only attempted to guide readers toward which books to read but, in some cases, how to read them. Periodicals like Schiller’s Horen or books like Johann Bergk’s The Art of Reading attempted to inculcate a contemplative reading focused on the literary form of the sort of books Christoph Wieland called works of art (Woodmansee 1994).

The public also had to be coached on proper behavior in the new art museums. When part of the Louvre Palace was turned into a public art museum during the Revolution, signs had to be posted asking people not to sing, joke, or play games in the galleries but to respect them as “the sanctuary of silence and meditation” (Mantion 1988, 113). The more sophisticated members of the emerging art public needed no such prodding to treat painting and sculpture as the object of a refined, even spiritual, pleasure. Parts of the British nobility had understood painting in the traditional way as having a public, even political, purpose, but this view was gradually modified over the century as writers like Adam Smith and David Hume argued that the primary aim of the arts is pleasure not instruction (Barrell 1986). If painting was to have a positive effect on morals, henceforth it would only be indirectly. Although a Gilpin could argue against bringing moral considerations into the experience of landscapes, he did believe there was an indirect moral benefit to fine art experiences: “When I sit ravished at an Oratorio, or stand astonished before the [Raphael] Cartoons, or enjoy myself in these happy Walks, I can feel my Mind expand ... and my Heart better disposed ... a Taste for these exalted Pleasures contributes towards making me a better Man” (Andrews 1989,53). The literary critic, William Hazlitt was even more effusive in describing the spiritual thrill of visiting the collection of the duke of Orleans in 1799: “A mist passed away from my sight; the scales fell off... a new heaven and a new earth stood before me. We had all heard the names of Titian, Raphael, Guido, Domenichino, the Caracci—but to see them face to face, to be in the same room with their deathless productions,... from that time on I lived in a world of pictures” (Haskell 1976, 43). Similar reactions to painting were taking place in France, where one critic referred to the exhibition room of the Louvre, as “this temple of the arts, and another critic wrote

*Figure 39. Jean-Honore Fragonard, A Young Girl Reading (1776). Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. Gift of Mrs. Mellon Bruce in memory of her father, Andrew W. Mellon. © 2000 Board of Trustees, National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.*

of the academy’s Salon exhibition of 1779, “I perceive a sentiment worthy of unifying the human species ... the passionate love for the Fine Arts” (Crow 1985, 4, 19). Already the cult of art was beginning and the inflated, quasi-religious rhetoric that goes with it.

In Hazlitt’s response we recognize the late eighteen-century Romantic sensibility of a cultivated gentleman. But what of the motley assortment of Louvre Salon visitors earlier in the century that included a great noble, a lady, a Savoyard odd-job man, a fishwife, and a “rough artisan,” the latter, “guided only by natural feeling” yet coming out with “a just observation”? (Crow 1985, 4). Was that “natural feeling” something universal, something common to both Mairobet and the rough artisan? And if it was common, why did people disagree so widely in their tastes? These questions formed part of what historians of aesthetics call the “problem of taste,” the issue of whether there is an objective or inborn standard of taste. If the fishwife or artisan already possesses this subtle judgment, it would seem so. However, if people had to learn how to behave toward the fine arts, taste would seem to be a social matter requiring education and leisure.

## The Art Public and the Problem of Taste

In chapter 5 on the category of fine art, we saw that a major criterion for separating fine art from craft was fine art’s appeal to the finer pleasures of taste rather than to utility or sensual enjoyment. Moreover, frequent experiences of this refined sort distinguished the polite public from the ignorant poor or the boorish rich and their “grosser” pleasures. Yet it was not only the laboring poor or the booby squires who were believed to lack the fine sensibility requisite to good taste but also the colored races, most women, and, on the wealthier side, the idle rich who mixed art and luxury.

Although many eighteenth-century writers on taste suggested that laborers lacked the capacity or means to acquire a refined taste, others, like Kant, believed that literacy would eventually make almost everyone part of the public. A good example of the differences over who was capable of refined taste was the debate over who was qualified to judge the French Academy’s annual Salon exhibition. At one extreme, Louis de Carmontelle could idealistically declare that “all classes of citizens come to pack the Salon ... [and] the public, natural judge of the fine arts,... renders its verdict” (Crow 1985,18). But the academy director, Charles Coypel, declared that “the public changes twenty times a day. . . . What the public admires at ten o’clock ... is publicly condemned at noon-Figure 40. Pietro Antonio Martini, Le Salon du Louvre 1785. Courtesy Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. By 1785 the annual salons of the academy drew large crowds and vigorous critical commentary; Jacques-Louis David, whose Oath of the Horatii of that year has often been described as a harbinger of several Revolutionary ideals, knew how to play off parts of this public against the more conservative leaders of the academy. After having heard them all, you will have heard not a true public, but only the mob” (Crow 1985,10) (fig. 40). A similar distinction was made with regard to the audience at the theater and concerts. In the first half of the century, the noisy parterre continued to be the place of cheap standing-room-only tickets, filled by merchants, students, law clerks, and a smattering of shop assistants, self-employed artisans, and servants (Rougemont 1988). Dubos asserted that the public of “the parterre, without knowing the rules, judges a play as well as the playwrights,” but immediately added that he did not “include in the public the lower classes . . . but only people who have acquired . . . taste through comparison” (Dubos 1993, 279). Many observers in the second half of the century claimed that the judgment of the parterre was declining because too many of the working classes were showing up: “Workmen and mercenaries decide the fate of music. They fill the theaters; they attend the musical competitions and they set themselves up as arbiters of taste” (le Huray and Day 1988, 125). Although these alarms were probably exaggerated, they are evidence of a combined cultural and class anxiety.

A small but significant segment of the European working population in the eighteenth century were African slaves and servants who can be seen in paint-ings of the time as a sign of their owner’s wealth and status. Two of the leading eighteenth-century writers on aesthetics offered the opinion that people of color were by nature incapable of a refined taste for the arts. David Hume’s comments are the most notorious and sweeping: “I am apt to suspect the negroes to be naturally inferior to the whites. There scarcely ever was a civilized nation of that complexion ... no ingenious manufactures amongst them, no arts, no sciences.... Not to mention our colonies, there are negroe slaves dispersed all over EUROPE, of whom none ever discovered any symptoms of ingenuity” (1993, 360). Although James Beattie and others refuted Hume’s inaccuracies and prejudices, Kant thought enough of Hume’s essay to cite it in support of his own contention that “the Negroes of Africa have by nature no feeling that rises above the trifling” (Kant i960,110; Eze 1997, 63).

The exclusion of women from those capable of the “fine taste” was not as sweeping as the exclusion of the dark-skinned races or the laboring class. Although a few male writers believed women were actually more discriminating than men, others, such as Shaftesbury and Kant, for example, believed women lacked the requisite intellectual powers to go with their sensibility. Instead of becoming connoisseurs of the fine arts, women were generally expected to become practitioners of the lesser arts or crafts. In Jane Austen’s unfinished novel, Sanditon, the “two Miss Beauforts” have been brought by their parents to a seaside resort to display their female attainments in the search for husbands: “They were very accomplished and very Ignorant,” Austen writes, “with the hire of a Harp for one, and the purchase of some Drawing paper for the other” (Bermingham 1992,14).

Of course, it was not only the vulgar poor, the colored races, and the majority of women who were identified as lacking the intellectual capacity for a sound comparative taste but also the vulgar rich who had no interest in the fine arts. Yet there was still another group of the rich and high born who, although they did collect paintings or host salons for noted writers and musicians, nevertheless still failed to exhibit a properly aesthetic attitude. Although highly sophisticated, they were excluded from that class of people with good taste by writers on the subject because they misused their fine taste for display, decoration, and diversion—what the eighteenth century called “luxury.” The critique of upper-class luxury was probably as important to the construction of the modern idea of the aesthetic as the rejection of the lower-class and female-identified pleasures of sense and utility. Of course, luxury in the simpler meaning of conspicuous expenditure had its eighteenth-century defenders—for example, Hume, Bernard Mandeville, Adam Smith, and Charles-Louis Secondat de Montesquieu. But from mid-century on, many critics began to focus on luxury’s deleterious effects on the arts, attacking conspicuous consumption and rococo prettiness in the name of nature, morality, and the ancients. When Lord Karnes described the sort of people who are in touch with the universal standard of taste, he eliminated not only those “who depend for food on bodily labour’ but also the sensualists, especially the opulent who use riches “to make a figure in the public eye” (1762, 369).

An important subtext in the attack on luxury was the blame many authors laid on women. Shaftesbury faulted women for the success of a rococo style that appealed primarily to the senses rather than to “rational” pleasures (Barrell 1986,38). Gabriel Senac de Milhan warned that women, particularly mistresses, were threatening the survival of the French nobility by encouraging the acquisition of lavish houses, gardens, furniture, paintings, and statuary (Saisselin 1992,41). Louis-Sebastien Mercier attacked the prevalence of portraits over history painting in the annual salons, declaring that “as long as the brush sells itself to idle opulence, to mincing coquetterie, ... the portrait should remain in the boudoir” (Crow 1985, 21).

But once the dark-skinned savages, the ignorant poor, the boorish middle class, the luxurious rich, and the frivolous or merely accomplished women were eliminated, there still remained the problem of identifying the characteristics of a “fine taste” on the part of the small group of upper-class men and women who were left. Writers like Hume or Karnes were content to identify further characteristics of the kind of person who would exercise such a taste, whereas a Dubos or Mendelssohn attempted to define the nature and operations of the fine taste itself. Thus the “problem” of taste involved not only the question of universality and innateness but also the question of what special social or mental characteristics were requisite to a fine taste. This was not an entirely new problem, of course, since taste had long been defined as a special kind of tacit knowledge, an “I know not what.” Now, however, a distinct category of fine arts had been constructed and had been conceptually and institutionally separated from contexts of use and everyday pleasure, inviting a similar separation of the experience of fine art from other kinds of experience. Over the course of the eighteenth century, innumerable artists, critics, and philosophers tried their hand at answering these questions in a flood of books, essays, and letters and, in the process, constructed the modern idea of the aesthetic.

## The Elements of the Aesthetic

Three major elements of the older idea of taste were transformed into the modern idea of the aesthetic: (1) ordinary pleasure in beauty developed into a spe-cial kind of refined and intellectualized pleasure, (2) the idea of unprejudiced judgment became an ideal of disinterested contemplation, and (3) the preoccupation with beauty was displaced by the sublime and eventually by the idea of the self-contained work of art as creation.2 The most important of these elements was the idea of a special refined pleasure that set polite or fine taste apart from the older notion of taste as preference. In the old system of art, pleasure, as well as use, was conceived of instrumentally; the pleasures of the arts provided diversions and amusements that contributed to health and civic peace. And something useful that fulfilled its purpose gracefully was also a source of satisfaction. But once the new system of fine art versus craft had been codified, the crafts were said to aim at a merely sensual pleasure or at bare utility, whereas the fine arts were said to be the object of a higher, contemplative pleasure. This was already suggested by the tendency of the polite classes to withdraw from popular culture and stigmatize it as “mere” recreation compared to the more refined pleasures of the imagination. The refined pleasures of polite taste now became the object of close psychological and philosophical analysis.

Early in the century, many writers argued that the pleasure of taste was something like a distinct faculty, an “inward eye” (Shaftesbury), an “internal sense” (Francis Hutcheson), a “sixth sense” (Dubos). Yet the idea of taste as a spontaneous faculty jostled uneasily with the need to develop taste by social experience. Addison assured his Spectator readers that if they wanted to know whether their spontaneous response showed good taste, they need only compare their reactions to “The Politer Part of Our Contemporaries” (1712, no. 409). A remark by Anne-Therese de Lambert nicely captures the tension between taste as a social attainment and taste as a quality of mind: “Up to now people have defined good taste as a usage established by the polite and spiritual people of high society. I believe that it depends on two things: a very delicate sentiment in the heart, and a great precision in the mind” (Lambert [1747] *990, 241). Lambert’s call for combining “sentiment in the heart” with “precision in the mind” shows that the shift from “taste” to the “aesthetic” came about partly as a result of giving a more intellectual character to the pleasures of the “higher” senses of the eye and ear in order to further distance them from ordinary sensual enjoyments.

Here again Addison was prescient in describing the “pleasures of the imagination” in the Spectator as located somewhere between the grosser satisfactions of sense and the more abstract enjoyments of the intellect (1712, no. 411). A number of writers, including Hume, Diderot, Rousseau, and Sulzer, not only distinguished sentiment from sensuality and feeling from emotion but also joined sentiment and reason in a kind of spontaneous or tacit knowledge, suggesting a third kind of experience combining elements of both. D’Alembert, for example, speaks of taste as having its own kind of “logic,” which discovers the “truths of feeling” (Becq 1994a, 687). Hume claimed that taste for the “polite arts ... improves our sensibility for all the tender and agreeable passions; at the same time that it renders the mind incapable of the rougher and more boisterous emotions” (Hume 1993, t2)- Diderot contrasted those who cry over any sad story with the true judges of art who possess “that gentle emotion in which feeling does not injure comparison” (Becq 1994a, 680).

If we want to get a sense of what the broader public was experiencing, two visual representations of refined taste can be of help. Anne-Marie Link (1992) has explored the representation of taste in the Goettingen Pocket Calendar of 1780, a middle-class almanac filled with maxims for everyday living. This almanac featured a set of twelve essays accompanied by engravings that contrasted the “Natural” with the “Affected Practices in Life,” a sort of compendium of good and bad taste. The March/April section had two sets of drawings and essays comparing natural versus affected “Sentiment” (Empfindsamkeit) in relation to nature and to art, respectively. The engraving depicting a “natural” sentiment or feeling in the presence of nature shows a middle-class man and woman with heads bowed before a sunset, and the accompanying essay by Georg Christoph Lichtenberg speaks of their “quiet,” “innocent,” “un-self-conscious” behavior. The contrasting engraving, depicting an “affected” sentiment toward nature, in contrast, shows a similarly dressed couple wildly gesticulating at the sunset (fig. 41). When we turn to the drawing depicting a “natural” sentiment toward art, we see two middle-class men standing side by side, their arms folded, as they gaze up respectfully at the statue of a woman. But in the contrasting “affected” sentiment engraving, one of the men points to the bunch of grapes held by the statue while exclaiming to the other man who is throwing up his hands in enthusiasm (fig. 42). The almanac illustrations and text reject irrational outbursts of feeling in favor of a calmer, more reflective sentiment of just the sort Diderot described—“that gentle emotion in which feeling does not injure comparison.”

A less direct but equally telling example of the new experience of refined sentiment can be found in the changed behaviors and attitudes toward music in France from the mid-i770s onward. In the first half of the century, when purely instrumental music was still regarded as inferior, the passages in operas and symphonies considered most thrilling were the imitations of sighs, shouts, cries, battle sounds, birdsongs, rushing streams, storms, and avalanches. Significantly, most of these passages could easily be heard above the din of con-Figure 41. Daniel Chodowiecki, Natural and Affected Sentiment (1779). First published in the Goettingen Pocket Calendar of 1780. versation and the beating of the conductor’s stick. By the 1780s, as audiences be gan to quiet down, both the kind of music written and audiences’ experience of it had begun to shift toward the musical expression of human feelings rather than the clamor of storms and battles. A turning point was the arrival in Paris of the composer Christoph Willibald Gluck, whose subtler scores and staging brought a shift from spectacular effects to expressive harmonics and orchestration. In describing an opera premier of i779> one writer spoke of “an extreme and uninterrupted attentiveness” despite “the strongest emotions visible on every face” (Johnson 1995, 59). As in the case of the Goettingen drawings, these fine art spectators are at once moved yet calm, combining intellectual concentration with intense feeling, the sort of attitude later theorists would call “aesthetic.”

Yet before the modern idea of a distinctive aesthetic experience could be fully formulated, two further refinements in the idea of taste had to occur. First, the attempt to specify more closely the nature of the pleasure involved in fine jfcu nft fbnrttn ^ funft*fcrtn-fnus Con noiffance Jes Ctrfo Conrtot/scttice cfes tfrty

*Figure 42. Daniel Chodowiecki, Natural and Affected Knowledge of the Arts (1780). First published in the Goettingen Pocket Calendar of 1780.*

taste” led to the idea of disinterested contemplation. Second, the investigation of the objective qualities of the beautiful led to the separation of the beautiful from the sublime and the picturesque, opening the way toward a more general concept.

In the old system of art, taste was usually tied to an “interest” or stake in the purpose of works of art, whether moral, practical, or recreational; in the new system of fine arts, the response believed most appropriate became one of disinterested contemplation. Paradoxically, the idea of “disinterestedness” involved an intense “interest,” in the sense of focused attention, but a complete absence of an interest, in the sense of a desire for possession or personal satisfaction, even of a moral or religious kind. There seem to be two sources for the general idea of disinterestedness, one aristocratic/political, the other philosophic/religious, each leading to a slightly different emphasis, although the two could be blended. According to the political perspective known as civic humanism, only those who have the wealth and leisure for reflection are able to rise above self-interest and take a view of society as a whole. Most British and French writers adopted some form of this patrician ideal of disinterestedness.3 It is assumed in Addisons often-cited line from the Spectator, “A Man of a Polite Imagination . . . often feels a greater Satisfaction in the Prospect of Fields and Meadows, than another does in the Possession. ... He looks upon the World, as it were, in another Light” (1712, no. 411). Shaftesbury combined the aristocratic conception of disinterest with a Neoplatonic philosophy that encouraged the rational contemplation of the true, the good, and the beautiful. In an often-cited dialogue examining the proper response to the beauty of the ocean, a landscape, and a human body, he contrasted “eager desire” with a “rational and refined contemplation” (Shaftesbury [1711] 1963,128). Sometimes, as in Dubos, Hutcheson, Hume, or Archibald Alison, disinterestedness seems to have meant little more than an ability to rise above prejudice or narrow self-regard (Townsend 1988,137).

The religious and theological concept of disinterestedness goes back through medieval mysticism to Augustine, who emphasized that all genuine love of God must be for the sake of God alone. Karl Philipp Moritz, whose idea of the work of art as a “self-sufficient world” we have already considered, described the appropriate response to such works in the vocabulary of the contemplative love of God: “As the beautiful object draws our attention completely to itself, it makes us forget ourselves for a while so that we seem to loose ourselves in it; and precisely this loss, this forgetting of ourselves, is the highest degree of pure and disinterested pleasure that beauty grants us ... a pleasure which must be ever closer to disinterested love, if it is to be genuine” (Moritz 1962, 5; Woodmansee 1994).

A third element that helped turn the notion of taste into the aesthetic was the addition of the ideas of the sublime and picturesque to the traditional focus on beauty. Rooted in theories of rhetorical or poetic style where it meant grandeur of effect, the “sublime” began to be widely used in the eighteenth century for anything in nature or art that produced an impression of overpowering greatness. At first the sublime was treated as an aspect of beauty but soon came to be contrasted with it. The sublime was variously described as an experience of something that is vast, awesome, or terrifying and yet gives pleasure because we contemplate it from safety—for example, an enormous mountain rising from a plain or a storm at sea or Milton’s portrayal of Hell. When contrasted with the sublime, the beautiful was often described as charming, sympathetic, harmonious, something we experience as immediately pleasurable (De Bolla 1989). Like other components of the modern system of art, many versions of the sublime were male gendered from the beginning. Even some of Burke’s male contemporaries noticed that his description of beauty, in contrast, was almost a caricature of stereotypes of femininity—delicate, timid, small, soft, light (Burke 1968, lxxv). Kant devoted an entire chapter of his early book on the beautiful and sublime to the idea that men are sublime (noble, heroic, powerful, deep), while women are beautiful (charming, sensitive, weak, superficial) (Kant i960). Theories of the sublime achieved considerable complexity by the end of the century, and the sublime has been seen by many artists and philosophers from the Romantics to the present as far more powerful and aesthetically important than the merely beautiful (Ashfield and De Bolla 1996). The rise in importance of the sublime, the picturesque, and other qualities alongside the beautiful opened the way for a new concept and term that might embrace what was most important in the responses to each (Cassirer 1951).

Alexander Baumgarten originally coined the term “aesthetic” for the kind of response he believed appropriate to the “sensate discourse” of poetry; he wanted a name for sensation’s own logic—and he called it “aesthetic” from the Greek aiesthesis, having to do with the senses (1954)- By providing a separate term for the joint working of sense and imagination in the arts, Baumgarten did three things: he gave feeling or sentiment a more important role in the panoply of the mental powers; he provided a technical term whose range of meaning could be more easily stipulated than the word “taste,” with its inevitable physiological and social associations; and he opened the way for the term “aesthetic” to become the name for a special mode of knowing. Since it was a new coinage, it could easily be given several significations, and there has been an equivocation from the beginning between the broad use of “aesthetic” for any sort of value system having to do with art or beauty and “the aesthetic” as a special form of disinterested knowledge, uniting feeling and reason.

## Kant and Schiller Sum up the Aesthetic

Although I have avoided following particular theorists of art or the aesthetic, I want to close this chapter by looking briefly at Kant’s and Schiller’s way of integrating the concept of the aesthetic with the new concepts of fine art and the artist. By doing so, they provided the first systematic justifications for the modern system of art as a whole.4 According to Kant, theories that make taste the application of concepts or rules, of sensual pleasure or utility, all admit of an “interest” or desire, whereas true “aesthetic taste” is a pure, disinterested pleasure in which we only contemplate an object. Put positively, aesthetic experience, for Kant, is a “harmonious free play” of our imagination (percepts) and our understanding (concepts). In a true aesthetic experience, imagination and understanding do not gear into each other in their normal workaday fashion of classifying or concluding but spin freely in a pleasurable harmony. So long as understanding and imagination remain in this aesthetic mode they simply explore and enjoy the world contemplatively (Kant 1987, 45, 51-52, 61-62).

Although Kant’s description of the aesthetic was almost completely taken up with what happens inside our heads, he did identify a quality in objects most conducive to stimulating this harmonious play of our faculties: “the form of purposiveness,” or “purposiveness without a purpose.” Some objects seem to be “purposefully” made, to have a form, yet we do not directly see a purpose or use for them. The forms of objects like “flowers, free designs, lines aimlessly intertwined” simply offer our mind an occasion to enjoy its own powers at play with no ulterior desire or interest (Kant 1987, 64-66, 49).

By making disinterestedness the key to the universality of aesthetic judgment, Kant distinguished the autonomy of aesthetic experience not only from the ordinary pleasures of sense or utility but also from science and morality. This seems to run counter to the many eighteenth-century writers on fine art who stressed art’s moral functions and, also, to Kant’s own conviction that moral freedom defines our dignity as human beings. Yet Kant did claim a highly indirect connection between the aesthetic and morality: beauty is a symbol of morality since both aesthetic and moral judgments are similarly free of external rules, and the sublime—our aesthetic pleasure in the midst of nature’s overpowering force—reveals our dignity as rational-moral beings. An aesthetic experience of beauty or the sublime does not teach us particular “moral lessons” but makes us aware of our freedom as moral agents (Kant 1987, 225-30, 119-32). For Kant, there is no way to escape the fundamental paradoxes of aesthetic judgment: it is pleasurable yet disinterested, individual yet universal, spontaneous yet necessary, without concepts yet intellectual, without moral instruction yet a revelation of our moral nature.

Once Kant had established the specificity of the aesthetic, he used it to explain the new polarities of fine art versus craft and artist versus artisan. Kant’s discussion of the fine art-versus-craft dichotomy remarkably recapitulates the history of the split in the older idea of art, although Kant presented the division as a logical rather than historical process. He begins by recognizing the older idea of art as any kind of human production in contrast to nature, then distinguishes within the general idea of art between the liberal and the mechanical arts. Next, Kant distinguishes two classes within the liberal arts: the “agreeable arts,” which aim at ordinary sensory satisfaction, and the “fine arts,” which aim at the properly aesthetic “pleasures of reflection.” Kant’s examples of merely agreeable arts are storytelling at a party, a nicely furnished table, or music at a banquet (Kant 1987,170-73). Kant’s list of fine arts includes the usual core of poetry, music, painting, sculpture, and architecture, to which he adds oratory and landscape gardening. Yet Kant also recognized that some things usually categorized as crafts because they aim at use could be treated as fine arts if they were intended “to be merely looked at, using ideas to entertain the imagination in free play, and occupying the aesthetic power of judgment without a determinate purpose” (Kant 1987,193).

Kant also interpreted the ideal of the artist as creator in terms of the aesthetic by making works of fine art the product of spontaneous genius and works of craft the product of diligence and rules. Craft work (Handwerk), Kant claims, is merely labor, something people do only if paid, whereas making fine art is an activity pleasurable in itself, a kind of “play.” Unlike the artisan or craftsperson, who follows a specific concept, the artist uses his genius “aesthetically,” exercising the imagination and understanding in free play (Kant 1987,171-75).

By systematically integrating the polarities of aesthetic versus purpose, artist versus artisan, and fine art versus craft, Kant offered a powerful philosophical justification for the modern system of art. Even though Kant himself was as interested in the aesthetic response to nature as to fine art, those who built on his work connected the aesthetic almost exclusively to fine art. Moreover, despite Kant’s attempt to show that the beautiful and sublime reveal our moral nature, the long-term effect of his work has been to reinforce the separation of art, science, and morality.

Kant’s younger contemporary, the poet and playwright, Friedrich Schiller, was deeply impressed by Kant’s formulation of the aesthetic but felt Kant had perpetuated a dualism between the spiritual and sensual that would be ruinous to society. When Kant’s Critique of Judgment appeared in 1790, the French Revolution was in its first hopeful phase, and Schiller’s warm support of liberty led the French Assembly to make him an honorary citizen. But when the Revolution took a bloody turn in 1792-93, Schiller rejected revolutionary politics in disgust, convinced that without authority the deep divisions in the human soul lead to chaos rather than freedom. Schiller’s Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man, written between 1793 and 1795, claim that it is not political revolution that will bring freedom without chaos but the aesthetic experience of fine art. Knowing that his claim for the redemptive power of aesthetic fine art would seem grandiose, he set out to prove it in a spiraling argument based in part on Kant, in part on a vision of human nature divided between spirit and sense and desperately needing integration (Schiller 1967).

In the genuine work of fine art there is already a harmony of freedom and necessity, duty and inclination, the “spiritual drive” and the “sensuous drive,” a union that Schiller called “play.” The artist-genius embodies the transcendent truth about life in the work of art as play, yet this truth is not a specific content but resides only in the form of the work. “In a truly successful work of Art the contents should effect nothing, the form everything, for only through form is the whole man affected . . . only from form is there true aesthetic freedom” (Schiller 1967,155). True fine art never aims at some particular result like stimulating emotions, teaching beliefs, or improving morals. Only when people renounce all such instrumental aims and exercise “a disinterested and unconditional appreciation of pure semblance” will they have “started to become truly human” (Schiller 1967, 205).

But how can such idealized works of fine art bring the political freedom and equality that have escaped the grasp of political revolutionaries? Schiller believed that art would change society by healing the inner divisions within each individual so that moral and political actions would no longer be a self-imposed duty but a spontaneous expression of the whole person. The exemplary images of fine art would draw each person toward a harmonious life in which the good can flow from natural inclination. For Schiller, fine art was not merely a symbol of morality as in Kant but the incarnation of a higher truth that will transform us by restoring our lost unity. “Humanity has lost its dignity; but Art has rescued it. . .. Truth lives on in the illusion of Art, and it is from this copy, or after-image, that the original image will be restored” (Schiller 1967, 57).

Given Schiller’s lofty understanding of aesthetic experience, it is not surprising that he considered only a few people capable of it. What Schiller called the aesthetic state,” in contrast to the purely political state, exists only among a saving remnant; it is like the “pure church or pure Republic,” found only “in some few chosen circles . . . governed . . . by the aesthetic (Schiller 19671 2.19). The “aesthetic education” of Schiller’s title, therefore, is not mere art appreciation but a dynamic process of salvation by art; art, just by being art, can redeem us by reuniting our sensual and spiritual natures. Schillers Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man exalted the new ideals of fine art, the artist, and the aesthetic to their highest pitch at the end of the eighteenth century. Whereas Moritz applied the language of the love of God to the love of art, Schiller gave fine art the redemptive power of God incarnate.

Although it would be nice to end our discussion of Kant and Schiller on this high note, we need to reconnect their elevated and exciting visions of aesthetic experience to more earthly realities. Both Kant and Schiller were admirable figures in many ways and more liberal than most of their contemporaries, but they were not immune to the prejudices of their time. We have already mentioned some of Kant’s racial and gender attitudes, although the Critique of Judgment, like his other two critiques, moves on the high plane of analyzing the universal faculties of the human mind. Yet it seems fairly obvious that only those who have attained a certain level of middle-class comfort could easily adopt a purely disinterested attitude: “Only when their need is satisfied can we tell who ... has taste and who does not” (Kant 1987, 52). One of Kant’s examples of the type of person who lacks aesthetic disinterestedness, is “that Iroquois sachem who said that he liked nothing better in Paris than the eating-houses” (Kant 1987, 45; Shusterman 1993,111-17).

Schiller’s passionate and self-sacrificing devotion to fine art is legendary, and, partly because of his high ideals, he had trouble supporting himself through the market, finally accepting the patronage of the duke of Augusten-burg to whom he dedicated the Aesthetic Letters. The Letters’ main themes were not only a response to the Revolution, however, but had been worked out two years before in a fierce attack on the poetry of Gottfried Burger, who was not only commercially successful but had even argued that poetry should be accessible to the broad public, invoking the old Horatian ideal of please and instruct (Woodmansee 1994). Schiller shot back that the true artist will appeal to “the elect of a nation” against “its mass” and claimed that the only permissible criterion for the success of a work of art is its internal perfection (Berghahn 1988, 79). Schiller was convinced that only a class freed from labor would have sound “aesthetic powers of judgment” and “maintain the beautiful entirety of human nature, which is... thoroughly destroyed by a life of work” (Hohendahl 1982, 56).

Obviously, the personal motives or class prejudices connected to Kant’s and Schiller’s ideas do not invalidate them as ideas, but it would be equally mistaken to ignore the specific historical context of their justification for the modern system of fine arts.5 The larger issue is not whether Hume or Karnes, Kant or Schiller shared the race, class, and gender prejudices of their time, but whether this kind of prejudice was an essential part of the new system of fine art and the aesthetic. Obviously, many of the same Enlightenment thinkers who held these social biases also believed in a universal human nature. In the French debate over who made up the true public for the Salon or the concert hall, there were not only those who systematically excluded the lower classes and most women as inferior by nature, but also others who believed that almost anyone could learn the proper behavior and attitudes. One writer claimed that any worker who saved up in order to frequent concerts of serious music had by that fact become part of the legitimate art public (Lough 1957, 218). On a more philosophical level, many British and German writers on taste often exhibited a univer-salizing commitment that implied everyone is in principle capable of refined judgment, even if in practice only the “politer parts” of society actually rise to it. Kant’s use of the notion of a sensus communis (not “common sense” but the common sensory and intellectual powers of humanity) implied that at least some Africans and Native Americans, if well fed, would be capable of disinterested contemplation. Although it is perhaps an exaggeration to call this universalizing strain in writers from Shaftesbury to Schiller “aesthetic democracy,” it is true that social, racial, and gender prejudices often stood in tension with a professed belief in a common humanity and aesthetic experience (Dowling 1996). .
