---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 3
chapter: 8
title: "Hogarth, Rousseau, Wollstonecraft"
source_pages: "157-168"
type: source
---

# Chapter 8: Hogarth, Rousseau, Wollstonecraft

## Hogarth’s “Hedonist Aesthetics”

Although hogarth rejected Mandeville’s celebration of luxury and self-interest, he wholeheartedly joined in the attack on the connoisseurs and self-styled “men of Taste.” Hogarth’s The Analysis of Beauty ([1753] 1997). aimed at settling “the fluctuating ideas of taste” by showing up the connoisseur’s preference for the continental grand style yet also doing justice to the new emphasis on enjoying fine art for itself. As in his attitude toward the emerging ideal of the artist, Hogarth’s approach to aesthetics was torn between two worlds, the old world of art/craft, which integrated instruction with common pleasures, and the new world of refined taste and art for itself. In fact, the first principle of beauty Hogarth discusses is fitness, not only the fitness of parts to whole but also fitness to purpose, for example, of bottles and knives, of windows and doors, of the design of a ship, and, above all, the fitness of the human body for its movements in work and play. Closely allied to fitness, according to Hogarth, are those central principles of the traditional art treatise, such as symmetry, proportion, and unity (Hogarth [1753] 1997> 25—26). But his greatest interest and enthusiasm are for two principles that hardly played a part in older treatises: variety and intricacy—principles that reflect not only the rococo style but especially the new emphasis on the viewer’s pleasure. Variety concerns surface form or ornament rather than use, its aim primarily one of “entertaining the eye.” Intricacy “leads the eye on a wanton chase” and “gives a pleasure” that “entitles it to the name of beauty” (27, 32-33)- Here we seem to have a very different kind of beauty than the beauty of fitness to purpose, one to be enjoyed for itself. And when Hogarth speaks of the pleasure of the eye following intricate curving forms as the pleasure of “pursuit as pursuit” we might think him on the track of what Kant would later describe as the play of imagination and understanding, or of “purposefulness without a purpose.

But there is another side to Hogarth that runs counter to the main direction of modern aesthetics. One would never expect a Karnes or a Kant to speak of intricacy leading the eye on a “wanton” chase. A key remark in the Analysis of Beauty is Hogarth’s jibe at the connoisseurs and academics ideal of imitating classical forms: “Who but a bigot . . . will say that he has not seen faces and necks, hands and arms in living women, that even the Grecian Venus doth but coarsely imitate?” (Hogarth [1753] 1997, 59). For Hogarth beauty is sensuous, bodily, one could even say erotic—not as sexual possession but as ordinary, sensuous pleasure. Hogarth’s “hedonistic aesthetics,” as Paulson calls it, comes through especially in his examples, which are mostly drawn from the body, for example, “the beauty of a composed intricacy of form” is illustrated with the flowing curls of the hair whose “intermingling locks ravish the eye with the pleasure of the pursuit” (Paulson 1991-93, 3:94; Hogarth [1753] 1997> 34). Hogarth also calls this kind of intricate form “the true spirit of dancing.” Although the true spirit of dancing can be seen in the theater, it is especially present in “country dancing,” something that is neither part of the pompous fine arts nor an artless jumping around but simply an art in the older sense (109-11). Like the ordinary movements of the body, country dancing is made up of many serpentine lines, a “composed variety.” But Hogarth finds his serpentine “line of beauty” not only in the curves of waving hair and men and women dancing but also in ordinary objects like candleholders or corsets or even in the worm gear of a fireplace control, an object to which he devotes two pages of the Analysis (33-34) (fig- 43). And just as the objective forms of beauty reside in ordinary bodies and everyday objects, so the perception of their beauty is available to the ordinary eye. One needs neither the superior social and economic standing required for

*Figure 43. William*

Hogarth, symbol from the cover of The Analysis of Beauty (1753). Hogarth daringly uses the transparent pyramid, symbolizing the Trinity, but replaces the traditional Hebrew letters for the name of God with his “line of beauty.” The curving line is given a serpent s head in allusion to a verse from Milton, also printed on the cover, describing Satan’s temptation of Eve. Dubos’s or Kamess “taste of comparison” nor the ascetic and intellectual discipline required for Moritz’s and Kant’s “disinterested judgment” but only an unspoiled eye and ear and a mind unprejudiced by the attitudes of the “men of Taste.” In the case of the human arts, Hogarth admits, the formal and utilitarian aspects may not always coincide, and something rather displeasing to the eye maybe useful, but in “nature’s machines, how wonderfully do we see beauty and use go hand in hand!” (62). Nature, especially the human body, combines the utmost in intricacy of line, proportion, and fitness as seen in graceful working, walking, or dancing. Such happy combinations of variety and proportion, intricacy and purpose are there for all to see. If Hogarth sometimes spoke of “men of greater penetration,” he did not mean the disinterested spectator of later mainstream aesthetics but the person of critical intelligence able to read Hogarth’s own intricate satires. His advertisement for the Analysis of Beauty declares it to be for “persons of both sexes” and written in a plain and entertaining manner (xvii). Paulson argues that Hogarth implicitly understood that taste is “a question of politics and power, of who has or should have the authority to judge” and aimed not so much to refine taste “as to democratize it” (Paulson 1991-93,3; 121). For the mainstream development of the modern system of fine art, the term “hedonist aesthetics” is an oxymoron. The whole point of what became the dominant strain in aesthetics was to distinguish “refined,” “rational,” or “aesthetic” taste from ordinary pleasures, whether of immediate sense or of satisfaction in purpose, and many leading writers on taste from Shaftesbury to Kant specifically excluded desire from the aesthetic. Hogarth felt the pull of the refined direction, but he also recognized its inherent elitism. He remained on the side of the “soldiers and porters and women with children” who were to be excluded from the new fine art exhibitions as persons “wholly inappropriate” (Pears 1988,127).

## Rousseau’s Festival Aesthetics

Hogarth was not alone in championing ordinary sensuality and equality. His outlook was shared by a figure so unlike him in temperament and interests as to make the linking of their names seem odd indeed, yet Jean-Jacques Rousseau was also torn between the old system of art and the new system of fine art. Even contemporaries charged Rousseau with paradox, if not contradiction, for denouncing the fine arts as a manifestation of moral corruption yet continuing to write operas, plays, and novels. Some scholars have tried to reconcile the two sides of Rousseau and make him more palatable to modern aesthetics, but I believe we have more to learn from his ambivalence.1 I will focus on three issues in Roussseau: the social role of the fine arts, the nature of taste, and the ideal of the festival.

Like many other young men on the make in the eighteenth century, Rousseau hoped to use music and literature as his entree to polite society. As a poor runaway from Geneva, he was forced to work as a music teacher and hired pen, tutoring recalcitrant children and writing digests and drafts until he made it to Paris, where Diderot and d’Alembert invited him to write articles on music for the Encyclopedic (Cranston 1991a). One day, while walking out to Vincennes prison to visit Diderot, who had been jailed by the censors, Rousseau read the Dijon Academy’s essay competition question on whether the arts and sciences tended to “purify morals.” Suddenly, he had an illumination and sank down under a tree as a swarm of visions passed before him on the theme that would become his life’s work: humanity is naturally good but has been corrupted by its institutions.

Rousseau’s prize-winning First Discourse (1751) was a thunderous “No!” to the question of moral benefits from the arts and sciences. One of the things that makes Rousseau’s essay so interesting for our story is that he specifically attacked the new category of beaux arts, as well as the criterion of pleasure versus utility, in the very year d’Alembert was publicizing both in the preface to the Encyclopedic. Rousseau’s critique drew on the familiar contrast between the decadent Athenians and the civic-minded Spartans: “While the vices led by the Fine Arts were introduced into Athens” the Spartans “chased the Arts and Artists” from their gates (1954, 9; 1992, 9).2 Although friends like Diderot greeted the First Discourse as a clever paradox, Rousseau enthusiastically took up his new role of cultural scourge.

Rousseau’s First Discourse drew many attacks, which forced him to reflect more deeply on the role of the fine arts in corrupting society. In the Second Discourse (1754). on the origins of inequality, he developed a hypothetical genealogy of the human arts, tracing a descent from the division of labor to private property and on to luxury and the fine arts. In this version of mankind’s fall, Rousseau calls the period between the pure state of nature and the corrupt social state, “nascent society,” a kind of golden age before private property when humanity enjoyed the simple pleasures of the arts as part of everyday life. “People grew accustomed to gathering in front of huts or around a large tree; song and dance, true children of love and leisure, became the amusement or rather the occupation of idle and assembled men and women” (1954, 71; 1992, 47). So long as people made and artfully adorned their own clothes, tools, and musical instruments, they were “free, healthy, good and happy,” but once envy and the division of labor set in, the result was private property, inequality, labor, and misery. Now the long process began that would eventually lead to the modern world of luxury and display in which the fine arts are used to mark social differences (1954, 49b3 Rousseau’s genealogy of the fine arts elicited little enthusiasm from Diderot and downright hostility from Voltaire, partly because it rejected the distinction between fine art and luxury that was crucial to the emerging idea of the aesthetic. In 1758 Rousseau also managed to alienate d’Alembert, who had written that the Genevans should establish a theater to improve taste. That was too much for Rousseau, whose Letter to d’Alembert attacks the supposed civic benefits of the theater, arguing that the theater must inevitably flatter the upper classes whose pity for suffering on the stage seldom translates into pity for real misery in the world outside. Since Rousseau had continued to write operas and plays ever since the First Discourse, he now looked the complete hypocrite. In reply he pleaded that he was prepared to tolerate fine art institutions as a moral palliative for already corrupt cities like Paris or London but not among the simple and wholesome Genevans.

Despite Rousseau’s powerful critique of the fine arts in the First and Second Discourses and the Letter to d’Alembert, there is evidence in other writings—the Dictionary of Music ([1768] 1969), for instance—that he saw the fine arts as something greater than simply palliatives. Yet given his general outlook, for a work of fine art to be more than a palliative, it would have to be purified of the taint of vanity and serve a high moral purpose. The second preface to Julie, or the New Heloise, for example, presents his novel as a means of being “useful” by reaching a wider audience with its message of the simple life, and Rousseau even suggests that husbands and wives ought to read it together to gladden their marriage ([1761] i997> 16). A few years later, Rousseaus article on opera in his Dictionary of Music declared opera the most elevating of fine arts, although the operas Rousseau seems to have had in mind were those like Gluck’s or his own The Village Soothsayer, which he believed would amend people’s moral feelings by portraying simple actions through a music that served the poetry ([1768] 1969). Yet this praise of opera’s potential moral effects is far from the idea of a disinterested appreciation of self-contained works.

Rousseau’s idea of taste showed the same sort of ambivalence as his comments on the category of fine art. Occasionally, he sounds like those who were moving toward the kind of refined taste that became the aesthetic, as in his emphasis on the union of feeling and reason in taste. Moreover, he shared the gender prejudices of many of those who were developing the mainstream s ideas of refined taste, sometimes contrasting the moral understanding of males with the “physical” taste “natural” to females (who should not pretend to judge something so serious as literature). In his tract/novel on education, Emile, he even sends his fictional pupil, who has been brought up in the country in a completely “natural” way, to live in Paris for a time since there would be more opportunities there to learn fine discrimination in the arts (1957, 426; 1979* 34i). Yet Rousseau’s more settled opinion is that good taste is a matter of knowing how to enjoy the “tissue of little things” that make up “the agreeableness of life.” It is through these little things that we learn to “fill life with the goods that are within our reach in all the truth they can have for us” (1957* 43<Y 1979. 344)- It was, of course, precisely the agreeable or pleasant that Kant used as a foil for the “aesthetic,” and it is no accident that one of Kant’s examples of the failure to adopt a properly disinterested attitude is Rousseau protesting against “the vanity of the great who spend the sweat of the people on superfluous things” (Kant 1987, 46).

In contrast to the refined or disinterested pleasure later embraced by mainstream aesthetic theory, Rousseau made taste a form of ordinary pleasure that he called “temperate sensuality,” or “voluptuousness.” In his later writings he set up a running contrast between the sensuous and the refined, the simple and the sophisticated, the natural and the artificial, the ordinary pleasures anyone can experience and the elegant pleasures of the fine arts available to the cultured few. In Julie his heroine’s way of dressing and eating are said to reflect a “sensuality without refinement,” and she has arranged the country estate of Clarens so that simple and honest “occupations” replace the artificial and fashionable “amusements” of polite society ([1761] 1997, 412-18). Rousseau’s ideal of the sensual enjoyment of everyday life is nicely conveyed by the opening lines of his account of the wine harvest at Clarens: “The sound of the barrels being banded on every side; the singing of the women picking grapes ... of rustic instruments spurring them on; the endearing and touching tableau of a general exhilaration that seems at this moment to extend over the surface of the earth ... everything conspires to give it a festive air, and this festivity becomes only the more beautiful upon reflection, when it occurs to us that it is the only one in which people have succeeded in combining the agreeable and the useful” (494).

But the full extent of Rousseau’s resistance to the emerging ideals of fine art and the aesthetic will only become apparent when we join this idea of taste as temperate sensuality to his convictions about the crafts and the festival. Rousseau believed that traces of the original unity of the arts and everyday life could still be found among the craft practices of Native Americans and even in some Swiss villages. In the Letter to d’Alembert, he describes a mountain com-munity near Lake Neufchatel where farm families spent the winter months making their own clothes, furniture, and entertainment, where almost everyone knew how to draw and paint and most could play the flute and sing. Rousseau also devoted an entire section of Emile to an attack on the invidious distinction between the artist and artisan and the “prejudice that despises a trade.” Emile, who is being educated according to nature, is not given the gentlemans lessons in connoisseurship but learns the honorable craft of carpentry instead (1957, 213-34; i979> 185-203).

At the end of the Letter to d’Alembert, after page upon page assailing the supposed benefits of theater, Rousseau finally asks, “Should there be no spectacles at all?” Yes, he replies, there should be many, but not “those exclusive spectacles that shut a few people up in a dark cavern ... in silence and inaction. ... No, happy peoples, those are not your festivals. It’s in the open air, under the sky that you ought to gather and surrender to the sweet sentiment of your happiness.” And what would be “shown” in these public spectacles? The people would show themselves to each other. “Plant a stake in the middle of a square and crown it with flowers, gather the people, and you will have a festival. Better yet; make the spectators themselves the spectacle; make them the actors; arrange it so that each sees and loves themselves in the other, so that all will be better united” (1954, 224-25; i960,125-26).

The most knowledgeable interpreter of Rousseau’s views on the arts has called Rousseau’s festival a “normative myth” (Robinson 1984, 252). But it was not a complete fantasy. The Letter to dAlembert recalls a spontaneous celebration Rousseau saw in Geneva as a boy. One night after the militia exercises in the Saint-Gervais district, the men gathered around the fountain in the square and began to dance to the sound of drum and fife under torchlight. As some five or six hundred danced hand in hand, winding about the fountain, wives and children woke to watch through open windows, then descended into the streets with wine, and the evening ended in toasts, embraces, and laughter. Rousseau remembers his father saying, “Jean-Jacques love your country. Do you see these Genevans? They are all friends, all brothers, joy and peace reign among them” (1954, 232-33; i960,135-36). For Rousseau, avid theatergoer and lover of opera, the memory of this simple and spontaneous festival had a greater authenticity and charm than the most perfect work of fine art contemplated in silence. It was, of course, an idealized memory by 1758 when he wrote the Letter. How far this idealized version was from the real Geneva, with its class divisions and authoritarian oligarchy, he learned when his native city burned Emile and condemned its author just four years later (Cranston 1991b).

The simple arts of a festival shared in by everyone are the counterpart of Rousseau’s notion of taste as temperate sensuality. Rousseau’s festival is a time of equality, spontaneous expression, a union of gentle pleasure and moral purpose. Inevitably, it invites comparison with Schiller’s ideal of “play.” There is much in common, especially in Schiller’s notion of play as uniting pleasure and duty, the sensuous and the spiritual. But Schiller made fine art the highest form of play and turned away from ordinary sensuality and utility to the disinterested contemplation of form. Since mainstream aesthetics and fine art institutions have followed Schiller, it is no surprise that the twentieth-century art world keeps vainly trying to get Art and Life back together.

## Wollstonecraft and the Beauty of Justice

Mary Wollstonecraft s life and writings would have scandalized Rousseau and irritated Hogarth, whereas she was incensed by Rousseau’s patriarchal views on women and thought Hogarth’s serpentine line of beauty a “narrow rule” (Wollstonecraft 1989, 6:289) (fig. 44). Although we now think of her as primarily a writer on feminism and politics, Elizabeth Bohls has shown that Wollstonecraft, along with Helen Maria Williams, Dorothy Wordsworth, Ann Radcliffe, and Mary Shelley, worked out a penetrating critique of the eighteenth-century move toward a contemplative aesthetic (Bohls 1995). The writers Bohls examines rejected or seriously qualified different components of the aesthetic, but all shared a will to validate the taste of women (and in some cases of the lower classes or colonized peoples of color) and to resist the separation of taste from the particular interests of life. Mary Wollstonecraft’s work not only contains a forceful critique of the idea of disinterested taste but also suggests an alternative vision of taste as sensual pleasure joined with a concern for social justice.4

The aesthetic implications of Wollstonecraft s political position are most memorably stated in A Vindication of the Rights of Men, her spirited riposte to Edmund Burke’s enormously influential Reflections on the French Revolution ([1790] 1955). Wollstonecraft recognized immediately that Burke’s conservative defense of ancien regime inequality was largely based on aesthetic positions he developed thirty years earlier in Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas on the Sublime and Beautiful ([1757] 1968). Burke set before his readers the alternative of the revolutionaries’ barren abstractions or the beauties of an established order whose “pleasing illusions . . . made power gentle and obedience liberal.” By comparison, Burke sneered, the revolutionaries’ philosophy “is as void of solid wisdom as it is destitute of all taste and elegance” (Burke 1955, 87). Wollstonecraft saw that Burke was appealing in politics to the same kind of refined taste by which he claimed we intuitively perceive the beautiful in art or nature.

*Figure 44. John Opie, Mary Wollstonecraft (ca. 1790-91)- Courtesy Tate Gallery, London/Art Resource, New York.*

The same spontaneous judgment that tells the ruling class which symphony is worthy of praise tells them which political system is worthy of emotional allegiance. Wollstonecraft’s critique cuts through Burke’s aestheticized political argument to show that his idea of a beautiful, organic society is only a rhetorical screen covering an existing power arrangement based on inherited property and status. She throws back at Burke his own aesthetic categories. Where, she asks, is the “infallible sensibility” of the upper-class colonial ladies who order their African slaves flogged and then “exercise their tender feelings by the perusal of the last imported novel”? No doubt, she continues, they have read Burke s Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful and have “labored to be pretty, by counterfeiting weakness.” The effect of Burkes notion of women as beautiful (“little, smooth, delicate, fair”) is to deny women the exercise of reason and correspondingly of morality and its sublime heroism (Wollstonecraff [1790] 1989,5:45). Rather than accept Burke’s view of taste and claim for women an equal share in the sublime, Wollstonecraft argues that true beauty and sublimity lie in moral virtue and that pleasure in beauty requires a union of feeling and reason in which “reason must hold the rudder” (Wollstonecraft 1995, 48—50). Poetry and music indeed have the power to arouse our spontaneously felt response through the imagination, but they simultaneously affect our moral reason. But what most deeply separates Wollstonecraft’s view of taste from the contemplation ideal is the direct link she establishes between the pleasure of taste and political morality. This becomes clearest in her handling of the idea of the picturesque in refuting Burke.

Wollstonecraft borrows the conventions of the picturesque to show that the beauty claimed for the well-laid-out English or French estate is at the cost of the ordinary people who work on them. This is something that the man of taste like Burke or Gilpin does not want to see.

I know, indeed that there is often something disgusting in the distresses of poverty, at which the imagination revolts. . . . The rich man builds a house, art and taste give it the highest finish. His gardens are planted, and the trees grow to recreate the fancy of the planter. . . . Every thing on the estate is cherished but man;—yet, to contribute to the happiness of man, is the most sublime of all enjoyments.

But if, instead of sweeping pleasure grounds, obelisks, temples, and elegant cottages, as objects for the eye, the heart was allowed to beat true to nature, decent farms would be scattered over the estate, and plenty smile around. (Wollstonecraft [1790] 1989, 5:56) “True pleasure” is not to be found in the disinterested viewing of purely pictorial values but in the simple beauty of a countryside that reflects social justice. She continues her argument with a contrasting description of the gross inequality she saw on a trip to Portugal a few years before, precisely the kind of trip on which Gilpin and other theorists of the picturesque encouraged people to view—from a suitable distance—a landscape embellished with ruined castles, crumbling huts, and ragged peasants picturesquely loitering: “Returning once from a despotic country to a part of England well cultivated, but not very picturesque—with what delight did I not observe the poor man’s garden!—The homely palings and twining woodbine, with all the rustic contrivances of simple, unlettered taste, was a sight that relieved the eye that had wandered indignant from the stately palace to the pestiferous hovel, and turned from the awful contrast into itself to mourn the fate of man, and curse the arts of civilization!” ([1790] 1989, 5:56-57). In place of the refined and contemplative taste of polite society’s picturesque, Wollstonecraft puts a “simple, unlettered taste” that combines grace with utility. For Wollstonecraft, true pleasure is to be found by turning “the eyes from ideal regions of taste and elegance” to “give the earth ... all the beauty it is capable of receiving” (61).

Bohls shows that Wollstonecraft s last published work—a travel memoir written to raise money—carried her belief in taste as the union of sensual pleasure and social justice directly onto the terrain of picturesque travel writing. The Letters Written during a Short Residence in Sweden, Norway and Denmark (1796) are unlike most travel descriptions of the picturesque, which typically omitted the human presence except as ornament and avoided mention of the economic uses of the land or the labors of the people who inhabited it. Even while exploiting the picturesque genre to sell her book, Wollstonecraft mixed in the economic and political aspects of the scenes she describes. She typically begins with a fairly conventional picturesque description, but soon veers off toward the practical and political. In Norway, for example, the rocks which tossed their fantastic heads so high were often covered with pines and firs, varied in the most picturesque manner. Little woods filled up the recesses ... and vallies and glens, cleared of the trees, displayed a dazzling verdure which contrasted with the gloom of the shading pines. . . . The little cultivation which appeared did not break the enchantment, nor did castles rear their turrets aloft to crush the cottages, and prove that man is more savage than the natives of the woods. I heard of the bears, but never saw them stalk forth, which I was sorry for; I wished to have seen one in its wild state. In the winter, I am told, they sometimes catch a stray cow, which is a heavy loss to the owner. (Wollstonecraft [1796]

1989, 6:263) Although the presence of cultivated fields did not break her enchantment with the rocky, pine covered landscape, the memory of feudal castles crushing cottages did. As Bohls points out, Wollstonecraft’s concern over the farmer’s loss of cattle completes the deflation of the picturesque conventions of aesthetic distance (Bohls 1995,156).

Wollstonecraft’s Letters reveal her to be a “woman of taste” but in a very different sense than the eighteenth-century “man of taste.” Although she shared a number of new ideals of fine art and the artist-genius, and occasionally reveals some middle-class cultural prejudices, hers was not the distanced aesthetic of polite society but an everyday pleasure united with a concern for political justice.5 As Bohls says of letter 8, which moves from a description of Woll-stonecraft’s pleasure in the landscape to a recollection of past love affairs and ends with her delight in rowing a boat out to a hidden grotto where she bathed: “All three kinds of pleasure, aesthetic enjoyment, sex, and exercise, are implicitly grouped together, contradicting theories that separate aesthetic experience from other pleasures as something qualitatively different, higher, and distinctively non-corporeal” (Bohls 1995,165).

In 1798, when Wollstonecraft prematurely died, the triumph of the modern system of fine arts was not yet complete; that triumph would come in the early decades of the nineteenth century as the new ideas of fine art, the artist, and the aesthetic took deeper root through idealism and romanticism and through the expansion of the new art institutions and art public. By the early twentieth century, historians and philosophers of the aesthetic would treat the autonomy of art and the aesthetic as a destined outcome, and the tradition of resistance would drop out of most of our histories and anthologies. But the resistance to the modern system of art, like the system itself, was not only a matter of ideas; it was also embodied in institutions and practices. It is striking that Wollstonecraft s most vigorous assertion of the union of beauty and social justice came in her defense of the French Revolution against Burke. A consideration of the fate of the new ideals and institutions of fine art in the crucible of the Revolution will cast a revealing, if sometimes garish, light on the final struggles between the old and new systems of art.
