---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 4
chapter: 12
title: "Silences: Triumph of the Aesthetic"
source_pages: "213-224"
type: source
---

# Chapter 12: Silences: Triumph of the Aesthetic

In EMILE zola’s novel L’assommoir (1877), a working-class wedding party decides to celebrate by a visit to the Louvre, thinking the edifying majesty of the art museum accords well with the occasion. Only one of them has been in an art museum before and they are overwhelmed by the finely dressed guards, the sumptuous surroundings, the mirror finish of the parquet floors, the heavy gold frames. When they come on Rubens painting of a country festival (The Kermis), showing drunken, vomiting, urinating peasants, many lewdly grabbing each other, the women “utter little cries; then turn away blushing deeply.” The men stare and snicker, “looking closer for obscene details” ([1877] 1965,92; [1877] 1995, 78). Finally, the wedding party gets lost in the labyrinth of galleries, and they scurry from room to room, numbed by the endless rows of paintings, etchings, drawings, statues, and cases full of figurines. Zola’s working-class wedding party whirling through the Louvre strikes us as comic because they lack the rudiments of what we believe necessary to appreciating museum art—some knowledge of art history, some sense of aesthetic distance. They give way to their instinctive sensual or moral reactions and are captivated by eroticism or the riches of gold frames and mirror-finished floors. Yet despite their chatter and scurrying, they at least behave with a certain respect, no singing, shouting, or game playing of the kind that had to be forbidden seventy-five years before.

## Learning Aesthetic Behavior

In America, where the great public museums only began to appear in the 1870s, there is evidence that it took more time to teach visitors both proper respect and the beginnings of an aesthetic response. By 1897, however, the director of New York’s Metropolitan Museum could proudly describe the success of vigilance, admonitions, and a few ejections: You do not see any more persons in the picture galleries blowing their nose with their fingers; no more dogs brought in ... no more spitting tobacco juice on the gallery floors ... no more nurses taking children to some corner to defile the floors... no more whistling, singing, or calling aloud” (Tomkins 1989, 84-85). But the issue soon became not just middle-class decorum but the proper aesthetic attitude in the “temple of Art,” as well. Even art education, always an aim of museums since the eighteenth century, was not enough. In the 1890s, many American art museums, such as those in Boston and Chicago, still exhibited plaster casts of ancient sculptures but finally put them in storage after younger curators and critics argued that only the finest “original” works belonged in the museum. The first aim of an art museum, the assistant director at Boston declared in 1903, is to “maintain a high standard of aesthetic taste” by choosing objects for their “aesthetic quality” and, thereby, afford its visitors “the pleasure derived from a contemplation of the perfect” (Whitehall 1970,1:183, 201).

Similar behavioral norms were taught theater and concert audiences, although the lessons were aided by a gradual separation of the “legitimate” theaters and concert halls from venues for farce, melodrama, and popular music. In Europe Honore Daumier caught the passionate reactions of lower-middle-class theater audiences in his “A Literary Discussion in the Second Balcony” (fig. 59). Lawrence Levine has recently traced the gradual separation of fine art theater from popular theater in America by examining the fortunes of Shakespeare in the nineteenth century. For the first two-thirds of the century, Shakespeare’s plays were not only the most frequently performed but also drew large and socially varied crowds, many of whom stamped their feet, whistled, shouted, and demanded instant encores. One reason Shakespeare appealed to such a broad audience was the wholesale alteration of his plays that had begun in the eighteenth century, leaving some versions of Richard III with one-third fewer lines and King Lear with a happy ending in which both Cordelia and Lear live on! Nineteenth-century promoters also interspersed the acts with other entertainments and usually followed the play with a farce to assure an enthusiastic and demonstrative response. Naturally, the upper classes who sat in the orchestra and boxes were not always happy with the their clamorous inferiors in the balconies, especially when pelted with apple cores (Levine 1988).

Class tensions mixed with cultural differences throughout the century, sometimes to tragic effect, as in the Astor Place Riot of 1849. Twenty-two people were killed when the militia fired into a crowd attempting to storm the Astor Theater and break up a performance of Macbeth by the snobbish English actor William Charles Macready. Macready’s highly publicized insults to America’s noisy, plebeian audiences had ignited popular anger, whereas the same kind of gallery crowds gave standing ovations to Macready’s American rival, Edwin Forrest, whose stentorian delivery was enormously popular. Yet only a dozen years later, the editor of Harper’s derided Forrest’s “rant, roar, and rigmarole”

*Figure 59. Honore Daumier, A Literary Discussion in the Second Balcony (1864). Courtesy Biblioth&que Nationale, Paris. In Europe as in America the nineteenth-century lower classes took their theater seriously.*

as good only for wringing tears out of working-class girls but praised the ele gant performances of Edwin Booth for eliciting refined attention rather than eager interest” (Levine 1988,59)- By the second half of the century, separate theaters for “art” performances began to appear in most of the larger American cities. By the 1890s, the theater audience had divided, and Shakespeare was performed uncut in “legitimate” theaters before silent and respectful audiences. Even if the term “aesthetic” was not always used to distinguish the “refined attention” of the art theater from the “eager interest” of popular halls, a kind of

*Figure 60. Moritz von Schwind, An Evening at Baron Spauns (1868). Historisches Museum der Stadt Wien, Vienna. Courtesy Erich Lessing/Art Resource, New York. Franz Schubert is at the piano, tenor Johann Michael Vogl is singing.*

aesthetic behavior was being inculcated and those unwilling to adopt it either were expelled or went elsewhere.

A similar division occurred in music. As William Weber has shown, there was a veritable “concert explosion” in Europe from 1830 to 1848, although in this case led entirely by the upper classes, who were divided in their tastes. One group was especially involved in salon concerts, often organized by women and held in fine homes. They favored the relatively popular music transcribed from opera or the symphonic repertoire adapted for virtuosos such as Liszt. Here was an art world where women—who played the piano themselves and oversaw their childrens lessons—were allowed to take the lead (fig. 60). Another part of the upper classes prided themselves on their knowledge of the classical symphony tradition of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven and preferred concert hall performances faithful to the composer’s text. This group was dominated by men who tended to regard their kind of music as “serious” art and looked down on the salon concerts and popular soloists. Weber suggests that the gradual merger of these two upper-class groups under the dominance of the male-led classical tendency marked the emergence of the modern “serious” music system in Europe. As a result, a patriarchal upper class controlled the emerging concert institutions in a way that subordinated the role of women and excluded the lower social ranks both programmatically and economically (Weber 1975).1

At the same time that this little world of fine art music was drawing into itself, other concerts, aimed at a broader spectrum of the middle and lower classes, were developing out of the eighteenth-century choral societies and promenade concerts, the latter providing an attractive setting where people could drink, smoke, talk, and walk about. Although a few people of the lower ranks might save up to attend a “classical” concert and the upper classes might drop in on choral performances or promenades, the social and cultural divisions were becoming well marked as the century wore on. There were also new kinds of commercial musical institutions that flourished in the rapidly growing urban centers, such as the cafe concert in Paris (fig. 61). Although people commented on the socially mixed audiences who frequented the cafe concerts in the 1870s and 1880s, these establishments seem to have been predominantly lower-middle-class venues, where singers expressed an idealized version of the life of “the people” in a music that both fascinated and alarmed the cultural elite who also frequented the symphony and opera (Clark 1984). In America, the gradual segregation of higher and lower forms of instrumental music took slightly different forms. The omnipresent community “band” played not only marches and polkas but also excerpts from operas and symphonic selections from

*Figure 61. Edgar Degas, Cabaret (1882); 9'/, X 17 inches, pastel over monotype. Courtesy Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., William A. Clark Collection. (26.72.)*

Haydn. As late as 1873, a Boston critic lamented the absence of a permanent symphony in his city to keep alive “acquaintance with the great unquestioned masterworks” (Levine 1988,120). The symphony orchestras that were founded in city after city across America in the latter half of the nineteenth century were in fact dedicated to becoming just such “museums of musical works.”

If the promenade concert in Europe or popular band music in America mixed genres and allowed freer behavior in a relaxed setting, the concerts of the cultured classes were clearly Art rituals in which a special attitude and silent decorum was expected. Yet even the nineteenth-century upper-class audience had to be “trained in the art of listening” (Gay 1995,19). In 1803, Goethe, who oversaw the court theater in Weimar, demanded that shouting or hissing stop and that audiences limit themselves to applause at the end of the performance.2 Complaints about talking and moving about during concerts continued throughout the century, but critics, symphony boards, and conductors kept after the audiences. The American conductor Theodore Thomas was famous for staring down talkers and even stopping the orchestra and raising his hands for silence. Here again, the campaign to quiet audiences was not simply about decorum but about the proper response to fine art. As the music critic Edward Baxter Perry put it, audiences must rise above “mere sensuous pleasure or superficial enjoyment, to a higher... spiritual aesthetic gratification” (Levine 1988,134).

In the realm of literature, questions of public behavior did not arise in the same way as music, although the development of “legitimate” theaters in which Shakespeare’s plays were reverently treated as sacred texts offers one parallel. The literary equivalent of the legitimate theater, the concert hall, or the art museum eventually became the college or university literature course and literature anthology. What needed to be “silenced” in the reading of literary works of art was not physical sound or bodily restlessness but the intrusive noise of thrill or amusement or political and moral ideas. People had to learn to attend to the purely aesthetic qualities of the literary work and not simply consume it they way they did popular genres.

Although the ideas and institutions of art, artist, and aesthetic were largely established by the 1830s, it took the rest of the century to separate completely fine art and popular art institutions and to teach the upwardly mobile middle classes the appropriate aesthetic behaviors. What Jacques Attali has said of the evolution of music in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries could be applied to all the fine arts: “When the concert hall performance replaced the popular festival and the private concert at court . . . the attitude toward music changed profoundly: in ritual it was one element in the totality of life;

*Figure 62. Eugene Lami, First Hearing of Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony (1840). Courtesy Musee de la Musique, Conservatoire National Superieur de Musique et de Danse de Paris. Photograph by J.-M. Angles.*

in the concerts of the nobility or popular festivals it was still part of a mode of sociality... in the concerts of the bourgeoisie ... the silence greeting the musicians was what created music and gave it an autonomous existence” (Attali 1985, 46) (fig. 62). The Rise of the Aesthetic and the Decline of Beauty If it took a long effort to inculcate a behavior of silent and reverent attention, it also took a long time for the term “aesthetic” to be regularly used for it outside of Germany where it had originated.3 But more important than the term, was the issue of whether there was, in fact, a special “aesthetic” faculty and what its characteristics were. The general belief in a distinct aesthetic faculty seems to have been widely accepted by the 1850s and even gave rise to a psychological “science” of aesthetics, which has continued its fitful course into our own day. One branch of it was carried on in an empirical vein by Hermann Helmholz’s studies of the neurological basis of pleasure in music and Gustav Fechner s research on perceptual preferences in the visual domain. Many of those who pursued these investigations clearly believed they were on the track of something wired into the human brain. Herbert Spencer described a distinct aesthetic experience at the end of his Principles of Psychology (1872) and Grant Allen analyzed the differentia of the “aesthetic feelings” from a Darwinian perspective, defining its principle as “Maximum of Stimulation with the Minimum of Fatigue or Waste” (Allen 1877, 39; Spencer [1872] 1881, 2:623-48).

If we turn from the general idea that there is a distinctive aesthetic mode of experience to nineteenth-century beliefs about the characteristics of the aesthetic, we find a wide range of views. Some writers stressed sensory or emotional pleasure, while others made central such qualities as imagination, intuition, empathy, or intellectual insight. Although the term “disinterestedness” has never been part of everyday talk about the fine arts, the general idea of an unprejudiced, contemplative attitude toward art continued to make its way among both the public and those who wrote about art. Many nineteenth-century writers who used “disinterestedness” intended the weaker sense of merely excluding crassly utilitarian or selfish interests. Others followed the stronger Kantian or Schillerian notion of a contemplative attitude that sets aside any direct theoretical or moral interests. Naturally, both the moderate and strong versions of disinterestedness admitted degrees of exclusion. Victor Cousin and Theodore Jouffroy developed a French version of Schiller’s position, arguing that even though Art indirectly inculcates morality and puts us in touch with the absolute, “it does not try to do so, it does not pose that as its aim.... There must be religion for religion, morality for morality, as art for art” (Benichou 1973, 258). Of course, there were others who denied even Matthew Arnold’s belief in a “subtle and indirect effect” on morals (1962, 270). By 1868 Algernon Swinburne, paraphrasing Scripture, could declare: “Art for Art’s sake first of all, and afterward the rest shall be added to her... but from the man who falls to artistic work with a moral purpose shall be taken away even that which he has” (Warner and Hough 1983, 237). By the end of the century small groups of intellectuals and artists had transformed the idea of the aesthetic from the notion of a disinterested faculty for experiencing fine art into an ideal of existence. In a way, the “aestheticization” of life proposed by many of the aestheti-cists, such as Oscar Wilde, was simply an extension of the superiority of the artist’s sensibility into every sphere—although this rejection of mundane instrumentality could take many forms, from the languorous sensuality of Pater to the Promethean overflow of Nietzsche.

We cannot leave the topic of the nature of aesthetic experience without noting one of the most striking differences between nineteenth- and twentieth-century discussions: the near disappearance of beauty as a central concept of aesthetics since the 1950s. The roots of beauty’s decline go back to the end of the eighteenth century and the emergence of the idea of the aesthetic itself. As we have seen, eighteenth-century theorists of taste not only were interested in beauty but developed concepts of the sublime, the picturesque, and the novel as well. Beauty, once the sole epithet for highest attainment in the arts, now had several rivals, and one of them, the sublime, was believed by many writers of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to be a deeper and more powerful experience. Various nineteenth-century artists and critics added still other values and experiences, such as the grotesque (Hugo), the strange (Baudelaire), the real (Flaubert), and the true (Zola), which they sometimes took to be more forceful than beauty. But there were also problems inherent in the concept of beauty itself. On the one hand, it was too closely associated with academicism and traditional criteria of ideal imitation, harmony, proportion, and unity. On the other hand, it was too mixed up with everyday notions of prettiness and praise—a beautiful horse, a beautiful shot, a beautiful investment. Although Schiller spoke of beauty along with fine art as humanity’s salvation in the Aesthetic Letters of 1793, a few years later he was writing to Goethe that “beauty” had become so problematic that it should perhaps be “dismissed from circulation” (Beardsley 1975, 228). In England, Richard Payne Knight lamented that “the word Beauty is ... applied indiscriminately to almost anything that is pleasing” (1808, 9). Nevertheless, most nineteenth- and early twentieth-century critics and philosophers from Hegel to George Santayana continued to use “beauty” as the overarching term for the highest aesthetic value, and aesthetics itself was often defined simply as the theory of beauty. The history and prestige of “beauty” was such that, like “Art,” it remained the name for whatever writers found most precious and transcendent in felt experience. Not until the full implications of modernism and the early twentieth-century anti-art movements had made themselves felt was “beauty” relegated to a minor role in critical and philosophical discourse on the arts.

## The Problem of Art and Society

When historians of aesthetics or literary theory come to the nineteenth century, they often reserve a section of their works for the problem of art and society. This issue is typically described in terms of a battle between those who believed in “art for art’s sake” (Gautier, Baudelaire, Whistler, Wilde) and those who believed in the “social responsibility of art” (Courbet, Proudhon, Ruskin, Tolstoy). Some historians have found it necessary to explain why jt was that a “theme that had not been given such serious attention between Plato and Schiller” should suddenly become so urgent (Beardsley 1975, 299)- The reader who has followed my argument up to this point will have no difficulty understanding one reason why the art and society problem in this broad sense did not receive “serious attention” up to Schiller. It did not because it could not. No one between Plato and Schiller wrestled with the problem of Art and society in this generalized form because they had no concept of Art as a distinct realm or social subsystem whose relation to society needed to be conceptualized. Only after fine art was constructed as a set of canonical disciplines and specialized institutions that were then reified as an autonomous domain could one ask what function the realm of Art should play within the larger society.

During the first half of the nineteenth century, there was only occasional talk of “Art for Art’s sake” (Gautier), whereas almost everyone still believed that serious works of art should embody a significant moral content, even if some people thought of artworks as having only an indirect moral effect. The full implications of the idea of art as an autonomous realm did not become apparent until near the end of the century. Even so, we can trace the development of a tendency to avoid direct engagement with political and moral issues. This retreat appeared in different countries at different times and was often related to the violent class conflicts of the period. Although there were always writers, painters, and composers who spoke to moral and political questions, the deeper problem was that the relative autonomy of the fine art institutions tended to neutralize social and political content by confining art works within the “world” of art.

The turn from social and political concerns seems to have occurred in the Germanies earlier than elsewhere. Although Schiller and Goethe never completely abandoned the hope that art might improve society, by the late 1790s, both had given up the eighteenth-century view of art as a means of public enlightenment. Schiller could even write in 1803 that Art should “totally shut itself off from the real world” (Berghahn 1988, 96). Many saw art as fundamentally alien to a society propelled by commerce and industry. Moreover, following the collapse of the Napoleonic empire, the various absolute monarchies of Central and Eastern Europe vigilantly exiled or imprisoned most social and political dissenters, including those who championed a politically engaged art, such as Heine. This made it easier for the idea of a completely autonomous art to gain early acceptance. The rest of society might be dominated by the police power and by middle-class materialism, but Art could be a refuge where the human spirit might roam freely (Schulte-Sasse 1988).

In France, in contrast, many romantic poets, painters, and composers remained politically engaged (whether as royalists or republicans) and saw art as a social instrument right up through the Revolution of 1848, when the poet Alphonse de Lamartine’s role as head of the failed provisional government symbolized Art’s failure in politics. The collapse of the idealism of 1848 and the political repression under Napoleon III blunted many artists’ political involvement (with brilliant exceptions, such as Victor Hugo and Gustave Courbet) and led them to a preoccupation with issues within the world of art. Another reason for the decline of political concern was the concurrent growth of the art world itself. After 1848 there was a steady expansion of specialized art institutions, such as the dealer-critic-curator-collector complex for painting and similar support complexes for music and literature. Now success as a writer, composer, or painter meant recognition by one of these art, music, or literary worlds, which were increasingly apolitical as a locus of upper-middle-class leisure activity. Although the deep cleavages in French society (e.g., the Dreyfus Affair) could still draw artists and writers such as Zola into its conflicts as individuals, the worlds of art, music, and literature had taken on a life of their own.

In Britain, as in France, many of the early romantics expressed their social and political engagement through their work, and later, the Victorians, led by Carlyle, Ruskin, and George Eliot, never doubted the high moral and social purpose of Art in reforming and beautifying a crassly utilitarian and materialistic society. One can even find a strain of “aesthetic democracy” in people associated with the aestheticst movement like Walter Pater and Oscar Wilde (Dowling 1996). But once the modern discourse of fine art, artist, and aesthetic was firmly established in Britain around mid-century, the inherent tension between Art as a distinct institution and its role as moral or social educator began to be increasingly acknowledged. The subsequent emergence of a belief in the absolute autonomy of art in some circles went hand in hand with the rise in status of the artist and the growth and privatization of the various art worlds. Late in the century when aestheticists such as Wilde or formalist critics such as Roger Fry attacked Victorian moralism in art, they often argued that artworks should be seen strictly in terms of their relation to the art world.

To follow out the arguments between the proponents of Art for Art’s sake and those who believed in the social responsibility of art would take us beyond our main subject and into the details of the history of aesthetics and art or literary theory. What is relevant to our theme is that both sides in these debates were often prisoners of the same regulative polarities of art. The declarations of a Gautier, Wilde, or Bell that Art has nothing to do with morality, politics, or “worldly” life but exists only for itself are a sort of reverse image of the declarations of a Proudhon, Tolstoy, and some marxists that Art exists primarily to serve humanity, morality, or the revolution. The extreme expressions of both positions assumed that Art is in fact an independent realm that has an external relation to the rest of society. For the one side, Art became a spiritual world of its own into which the aesthetically sensitive might retreat from a sordid, materialistic society; for the other Art was seen as a powerful instrument of communication for changing that society. Few nineteenth-century writers attacked the problem at its root: the regulative polarities of the modern system of art. Eventually, artists and critics who shared John Ruskins or George Eliot’s belief in a more intimate connection between works of art and the social good would have to challenge the underlying polarities of the fine art system.
