---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 5
chapter: null
title: "Part V — Beyond Fine Art and Craft (Overview)"
source_pages: "225-228"
type: source
---

# Part V: Beyond Fine Art and Craft — Overview

My alternative story of the great division that produced the modern system of the fine arts is largely complete. Obviously, there was no fixed point at which all the main elements of the system were generally accepted. Just as there were anticipations of modern ideals of the artistic vocation from the Renaissance on, so remnants of the old art/craft system have endured. But the period from roughly 1800 to 1830 seems to have been the moment of final consolidation and elevation. Certainly, by the midnineteenth century, the term “art” had not only come to designate a category of fine arts (poetry, painting, music, etc.) but also an autonomous realm of works and performances, values and institutions. Art could now be spoken of as a kind of metaphysical essence, whether conceived in the technical terms of idealist or vitalist philosophies or in the more general way that Comte or Tolstoy wrote of it. In either case a reified Art was now something one could live and die for and talk about endlessly, the art Marcel Proust later invoked with such pathos in Time Regained. Correspondingly, the ideal of the artist as creator was viewed as a kind of religious calling, sometimes raised to the status of prophet and priest but also allowing for the poses of dandy or bohemian alongside martyr and rebel. Finally, “works of art,” as the fixed creations of inspired imagination, were to be reverently attended to aesthetically, “for themselves,” a state of mind and behavior steadily inculcated in concert audiences and museum visitors. The shadow side of the nineteenth-century elevation of art was the further demotion of the crafts and popular arts, the reduction of many artisans to industrial operatives and an increased separation of the audiences for fine and popular arts. By the end of the nineteenth century, the great division of the eighteenth century had become a gulf.

Although the main assumptions and institutions of the moderij fine art system were largely in place by the 1830s and have endured down to the present, many aspects of the system have continued to be refined and elaborated. This is not the place to follow the evolution of competing theories of art, artist, and the aesthetic or the development of new directions in art institutions, they are the proper subjects for special histories. The developments we do need to follow in order to bring our story of art divided down to the present are two broader processes affecting the fine art system as a whole. I call them simply assimilation and “resistance.”

By “assimilation” I mean the steady expansion of the domain of fine art from its original core of poetry, music, painting, sculpture, and architecture (plus dance, oratory, etc.) to include new or once-excluded arts, such as photography in the late nineteenth century, film, jazz, and “primitive art” in the early twentieth, arts in “craft” media since the 1950s, electronic music and the new journalism since the 1960s, and since the 1970s) almost anything. The true counter process to these assimilations has not been conservative opposition to expanding the boundaries of art but a more radical resistance to the deeper divisions of the art system, sometimes on behalf of craft in the sense of functional or popular arts, sometimes on behalf of the older union of art and craft in the sense trying to reintegrate art and society or art and life. Thus, the kinds of resistance to the fine art system that I want to explore have not rejected one or two concepts or practices, such as the fetish of “originality or the self-contained “work,” but have attacked the root polarities of the system itself. But just as the emergence of the modern fine art system was not simply the result of changes in theories and ideals but included the creation of separate institutions as well, so assimilation and resistance have been deeply involved with art institutions. This is most obvious in the case of assimilation, which is not only a matter of a few critics or philosophers arguing for the inclusion of new arts or art forms in the category of art but of art museums, symphony organizations, and literature OVERVIEW departments actually incorporating them. Similarly, resistance to the underlying polarities of the fine art system is a matter not only of some people verbally attacking the narrowness of the dominant ideals of fine art, artist, and the aesthetic but also of artists and curators working against or outside of established art institutions. Yet assimilation and resistance turn out to be dialectically related. Art institutions seek to perpetuate themselves by incorporating the ideas and works of those who resist them, and those who resist are constantly tempted to be satisfied with merely expanding the categories and institutions of art. “Anti-art” movements such as dada and Russian constructivism or the authors of anti-art gestures such as Marcel Duchamp or John Cage, for example, were often ambivalent toward the category of art and the art institutions they attacked, and those institutions in turn were quick to recuperate anti-art works and actions. Each of the remaining chapters looks at examples of both assimilation and resistance in three overlapping periods: 1830-1914 (chap. 13), 1890-1960 (chap. 14), and 1950 to the present (chap. 15).

In his 1884 essay “The Art of Fiction,” Henry James was still discussing the issue of whether the novel is not only “an art” but also “one of the fine arts” (James 1986,167). As interesting as it would be to tell the story of the acceptance of the contemporary novel as fine art through its integration into the literary curriculum, I have chosen instead to follow the assimilation of photography, which was invented in 1839 soon after the modern system of fine arts was consolidated. As in the case of the novel, the assimilation of photography was not complete until the early twentieth century when photography began to enter the art museums. In the case of resistance, the earlier tradition exemplified by Hogarth, Rousseau, and Wollstonecraft began to take on a new form with the completion of the system of fine arts in the 1830s. By 1841, Emersons essay “Art” challenged not only the demotion of the useful arts and ordinary pleasures but also called for overcoming “art’s separate and contrasted existence.” Other critiques of the categories of the fine art system soon followed from people as diverse in outlook as Kierkegaard, Marx, and Tolstoy. But the most thoroughly worked out challenge to the fine art-versus-craft split was that of Ruskin and Morris, whose ideas found an institutional embodiment in the Arts and Crafts movement that spread from Britain to the Continent and to America in the last decades of the nineteenth century (chap. 13). -v Yet from the 1890s on, the turn toward what we call modernism in the fine arts reaffirmed the divisions of the fine art system and the process of assimilating new styles. At the same time, the modernist rejection of traditional ideas of imitation and beauty demanded new forms of theoretical justification, such as formalism (Roger Fry) and expressionism (Benedetto Croce). But the combined effects of modernist experimentation and the shock of World War I also produced vigorous acts of resistance to the separation of art and society. Three exemplary movements of resistance just after the war were dada/surrealism, Russian constructivism, and the Bauhaus. By the 1930s there were also major critical and philosophical attempts to rethink the fine art-versus-craft and art-versus-life separations by R. G. Collingwood, John Dewey, and Walter Benjamin, but World War II cut them short and the postwar world of the 1950s returned to a preoccupation with formalist and expressionist issues surrounding modernism (chap. 14).

Since the 1960s, the process of assimilation has accelerated until the boundaries of what can count as art have expanded to embrace almost anything—although the fine art system has usually been able to extend the fine art-versus-craft division into each new territory it colonizes. But resistance to the polarities of the modern system of art has also flourished, not only among writers and composers who cross the boundaries between the high and the popular but also among artists identified with conceptual, environmental, and performance approaches. My final chapter explores examples of both assimilation and resistance from the second half of the twentieth century, two processes that work in opposite directions, yet each in its own way undermining the fine art system and raising the question of whether we are moving beyond art divided (chap. 15).
