---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 5
chapter: 13
title: "Assimilation and Resistance"
source_pages: "229-245"
type: source
---

# Chapter 13: Assimilation and Resistance

On January 7, 1839, the astronomer Francois Arago presented Louis Daguerre s discovery of photography to a special session of the French Academy of Sciences. Over the next months, Daguerre demonstrated and publicized his invention around Paris, and the French government finally agreed to purchase the patent rights and make them public property. As the excitement over the new process spread, the painter Paul Delaroche is supposed to have exclaimed, “From this day painting is dead” (Schwarz 1987, 90). As it turned out, painting still had a long career ahead of it, including a remarkable phase of realism. Initially, the French and English press had been in no doubt that a marvelous new fine art medium had been discovered. Yet the limitations of photography as an art medium soon became apparent: not only the lack of color but also the troubling fact that a “machine” did most of the work. Painters such as Delaroche and Eugene Delacroix soon saw that photography would hardly replace painting but could become a useful aid for such things as recording difficult poses of live models (Scharf 1986; Sagne 1982).

## The Assimilation of Photography

Although photography did not kill off painting in the years following 1839, some kinds of functional painting did decline and virtually disappear, such as the affordable miniature portrait, whose makers either quit or became photographers or tinters in photographic shops. Over the next four decades (1840 - 80) professionals and amateurs around the world experimented with the rapidly improving papers, lenses, and mechanisms, producing millions of images. Amid this enthusiasm for recording the visible, a few photographers sought to make pictures that could claim fine art status. In the ensuing debate over photography as art, both sides worked within the same polarities of the modern discourse of art: fine art versus craft became intellect versus mechanism, artist versus artisan became imagination versus technical skill, aesthetic versus instrumental became the single work viewed for itself versus multiple copies for use or diversion.

The fullest case against photography as a fine art was worked out in detail by Lady Eastlake as early as 1857, and the same kind of arguments were recycled from Baudelaire in the 1859 to Santayana and Croce in the early twentieth century. Lady Eastlake was quite willing to grant photography the obvious virtue of accurate reproduction; she even suggested that photography might ultimately liberate painting from slavish imitation. But this did not make photography a fine art. The artist exercises “free-will of the intelligent being, the photographer merely obeys “the machine” (Eastlake [1857] 1981, 98). A second reason photography cannot be a fine art, according to Lady Eastlake, is that it serves practical ends, whereas art “ought to be” pursued mainly for its own sake. Finally, the artist creates single works, whereas the photographer makes multiple prints, a sure sign that photography is a commodity not a fine art. Photography, Lady Eastlake concluded, is especially appropriate to “the present age, in which the desire for Art resides in a small minority, but the craving for cheap, prompt and correct facts in the public at large” (96-98). Across the channel, Baudelaire was content to snarl that the “squalid public, believing Art to be the exact imitation of nature” and “photography to be the absolute Art,” has “rushed like a single Narcissus, to contemplate its trivial image on a scrap of metal” (Baudelaire [1859] 1986,289). Honore Daumier caricatured the mania for photography in his drawing of Nadar photographing Paris from a balloon (fig. 63).

The photographers and critics who set out to answer these objections over the next seventy years seldom attacked the underlying polarity of fine art versus craft; they simply claimed that certain kinds of photographs belonged to the “art” side of it. Applying the art-versus-craft polarity within photography, they used the very criticisms of a Lady Eastlake against the merely technical practitioners. As Alfred Stieglitz put it, photography is “a plastic and not a mechanical process,” although it can be “made mechanical by the craftsman, just as the brush becomes a mechanical agent in the hands of a mere copyist (Stieglitz [1899] 1980,164).

Of course, the champions of art photography didn’t just argue their case but, in addition, produced prints whose unusual qualities set them apart from ordinary photographs. Julia Margaret Cameron is among the best known of those who aspired to “ennoble Photography and secure for it the character and uses of High Art” by deliberately idealizing her portrait subjects through costume, lighting, and an ethereal blur (Newhall 1982, 78). Oskar Rejlander and Henry Peach Robinson, in contrast, used multiple negatives of carefully arranged sym-Figure 63. Honore Daumier, Nadar Raising Photography to the Height of Art (1862). Courtesy Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.

iCniMV APHID I'HOTOCRAPHIE bolic or narrative scenes to produce photographs that looked like contemporary pre-Raphaelite paintings (fig. 64). But it was the pictorialist movement at the end of the century, with its impressionistic soft focus and aestheticized poses, that was most successful in gaining respect for photography’s claim to be a fine art medium and for the photographer as an artist (fig. 65).

Key arguments used by many of the late nineteenth-century proponents were expression and originality. It is perhaps no accident that pictorialism and the emphasis on personal expression and the single art print emerged at the same time the cheap hand camera and film were turning photography into a public pastime. “The point is,” Stieglitz wrote, “whatyou have to say and how to

*Figure 64. Henry Peach Robinson, Fading Away (1858). Courtesy George Eastman House, Rochester, N.Y.*

say it. The originality of a work of art refers to the originality of the thing expressed and the way it is expressed, whether it be in poetry, photography, or painting” (Stieglitz [1899] 1980,164).

Ironically, the application of the art-versus-craft polarity to photography may have had a rebound effect on painting, leading to a renewed importance of signs of the hand in brushwork. Richard Shiff has suggested that photography contributed to a rejection of the finished surface of a classicism that now looked too photographic (1988, 28). Whereas once the difference between artist and artisan was defined in terms of mental work versus handwork in order to elevate the artist into the company of gentlemen, now that the artist’s place in the world of spirit was secure, signs of the hand could return from impressionism on. The art photographers, of course, were not fighting a prejudice against handwork but the accusation of mindless mechanism. Some of the pictorialists—Edward Steichen, for instance—even left brush marks on their hand-tinted prints in an attempt to show their equality with painters.

Yet the ultimate consecration of photography as part of the fine arts required more than the simulation of handwork or the intellectual conversion of a few art critics; photography also had to be accepted by the art institutions. Pictori-alism led the way with a series of well-received exhibitions in the 1890s, one of them, the first ever in an art museum, at the Hamburg Kunsthalle in 1893, whose

*Figure 65. Gertrude Kasebier, Blessed Art Thou among Women (1899). Photogravure, 23.6 X 14 centimeters. Gift of Daniel, Richard, and Jonathan Logan, 1984.1638. Photograph © 2000, Art Institute of Chicago. All Rights Reserved.*

daring director wrote of the public’s astonishment at seeing photographs hung in painting galleries: “To them it seemed like holding a natural history congress in a church” (Newhall 1982, 146). In 1910 the Albright Art Gallery in Buffalo hosted an international exhibition of pictorial photography organized by Stieglitz and even bought twelve prints for permanent display in the museum. Stieglitz wrote ecstatically to a friend that “the dream I had in 1885 in Berlin has become a reality—the complete acknowledgment of photography by an important institution” (Newhall 1980,189). Although the full acceptance of photography by most museums^and fine art schools took several more decades, the basic pattern for its assimilation into fine art had been set. The key to this long struggle for the recognition of photography was the application of the art-versus-craff and artist-versus-artisan polarities within photography, plus the sanctioning of art photography by art institutions like the museum, art criticism, and, much later, university schools of fine art. The expressionist and formalist arguments that came in the later stages of the assimilation process were themselves refinements of the regulative assumptions about the nature of fine art, the artist, and the aesthetic established decades earlier. New versions of expressionist and formalist arguments would play an important role in the acceptance of modernism after the turn of the century (see chap. 14).

## Varieties of Resistance: Emerson, Marx, Ruskin, Morris

It is striking that at the same time Stieglitz was using the fine art—versus-craft dichotomy to divide photography, people such as Morris were attacking the art-versus-craft division as ruinous for both the arts and society. Although the Arts and Crafts movement of the end of the nineteenth century focused on reuniting the fine arts and crafts and restoring the dignity of the craftsperson, the earlier resistance of William Wordsworth and Ralph Waldo Emerson focused on the larger separation of art from life. George Leonard has argued that Wordsworth’s vision of a “blissful hour” when we will find Paradise in the simple produce of the common day” was a dream of eventually dispensing with the separate work of art. Leonard reads the famous lines from “The Tables Turned” of the Lyrical Ballads in this sense:

We murder to dissect Enough of Science and of Art;

Close up those barren leaves. Readers have often noticed the dissections of science but overlooked the barrenness of Art (Leonard 1994,74-79)- Yet many of Wordsworth’s other writings show he was hardly immune to the ideals of fine art and the artist, and in calling Art barren, he may have been aiming at the artificial diction of established poetic language. We have seen him intoning the artist’s “high calling” to “creative Art,” or celebrating the imagination’s “absolute power,” and later in his career he argued for the doubling of the copyright period because it would encourage writing lasting works of art for posterity rather than pleasing readers in the present (Woodmansee 1994).

Emerson’s resistance to fine art’s separation from life was also ambivalent, but his attack on the separateness of fine art was more direct than Wordsworth’s was. Emerson’s journals and essays of the 1830s and 1840s are strewn with dismissals of painting and sculpture as “cripples and monsters,” “toys and trumpery,” “abortive births,” “hypocritical rubbish” (1950, 312; 1903, 2:358; 1969, 7:143). Yet in another essay of the same period he spoke of poetry as the summit of the hierarchies and called poets nothing less than “liberating gods.” Even so, the true poet for Emerson is not the artist-writer striving to create a self-contained work for our admiration but the person who is open to the life of the universe and allows the ethereal tides to run through him, turning “the world to glass” (1950, 329; 1903, 3:30). Emerson’s ambivalence toward the fine arts was deeply rooted in his transcendentalist conviction that the universal mind flows through each of us as through all things: “We are children of the fire” (1950, 320; 1903, 1:10; 1903, 3:30). Reappraising every institution in the light of this conviction, Emerson defined art as creative expression responding to the inflowing of the spirit (1969, 541). As a result, not only individual works but entire arts as well, such as painting or sculpture, become less important than Art, itself, the divine urge to create.

This is the root of Emerson’s paradoxical rethinking of the modern idea of art: he talks of the essence of art in tones as exalted as any of the German romantics and idealists, yet he subordinates individual arts and art works in a strikingly new way. Returning from a walk in the woods with Thoreau, he recorded in his journal: “Why should we build a St. Peter’s if we had the seeing Eye which beheld all the radiance of beauty 8c majesty in the matted grass & the overarching boughs? Why should a man spend years carving an Apollo who looked Apollos into the landscape with every glance he threw?” (1969, 7:143). Emerson does grant the fine arts two functions: to help us see the divine in nature and humanity and to remind us of the universal urge for expression in us all. Yet any object in nature—a squirrel jumping from branch to branch or a litter of pigs—might serve to reveal the spirit just as well as poetry or painting. “True art is never fixed, but always flowing. The sweetest music is not in the oratorio, but in the human voice when it speaks from its instant of life tones of tenderness, truth or courage” (1950.313; 1903, 2:363).

One of Emerson’s most persistent criticisms of the fine arts was that they had lost contact with their social functions and become “mere flourishes to please the eye of persons who have associations with books and galleries” (1964-72, 2, 54; 1969, 5:210-11). To counter this trivialization we need to “carry art up into the kingdom of nature, and destroy its separate and contrasted existence” (1950, 313). Despite his subordination of the individual work of Art to the creative spirit and his call for a reunion of the fine and useful arts, even for the disappearance of art as a “separate and contrasted” realm, Emerson still clung to the use of Art as the name for the highest of human spiritual powers and to the ideal of the poet as the bearer of a redemptive revelation, calling poets “liberating gods” (1950, 334). Yet even in the midst of his most ecstatic celebration of the poet, Emerson did not completely forget this vision of overcoming art’s separate existence: “We are all poets at last... each of us is part of eternity and immensity, a god walking in the flesh.” The great poets’ superiority is only that they “saw and celebrated this marvel whilst we slept” (1964-72, 3:365). Emerson famously condemned a “foolish consistency” as the “hobgoblin of little minds”; his was a capacious mind indeed, and we have more to learn by allowing him his inconsistencies than in trying to reconcile the tensions. Meanwhile, Karl Marx, John Ruskin, and William Morris were developing more specific, although similarly ambivalent, challenges to the dichotomies of the modern fine art system.

For the young Marx of the 1840s, industrial capitalism not only had divided humanity into capitalist and worker and distorted the human experience of production but it had also perverted the senses themselves. The working classes had been reduced to mechanical activity, whereas the capitalist class no longer made and participated in art but spent their time acquiring money to buy things: “Your money can eat, drink, go dancing, go to the theater, appropriate art” (1975, 361). The combination of private property and the division of labor had resulted in an exaggerated polarity of a use-value reduced to mere utility and an exchange-value that turned all the products of human making into commodities. Marx was convinced that society could only overcome these divisions and restore the unity of use and enjoyment through the abolition of private property. After that happened, both need and enjoyment would have “lost their egoistic nature” and use would no longer be “mere utility” but, combined with enjoyment, would “become human use” (1975,351). This would be possible because the abolition of private property would enable a mode of production in which making art was not different in kind from other making. In such a society, the artist would no longer stand apart as the only free creator; everyone would be free to develop his or her powers to the fullest. There will be “no painters but, at most, people who engage in painting among other activities” (Marx and Engels 1970,109). Art will no longer be divided into fine art versus craft and the artist set above the artisan; there will be only human arts and human creating. Of course, the later Marx turned away from such utopian speculations to build a theory of “scientific socialism” and inevitable revolution, but his fragmentary reflections on art still inspire those who seek a reintegration of art and everyday life in a context of social justice (Rose 1984).

Not long after the young Marx formulated his critique of the alienating effects of capitalism on the arts, the socially conservative moralist and art critic John Ruskin began to attack the separation of the fine and applied arts. In his early writings, Ruskin passionately celebrated beauty in nature and art as leading us to love the creator of nature, and Ruskin also celebrated the artist in the usual terms of genius and vision. Although he never wavered in his belief in beauty and creativity, a change came over Ruskin in the 1850s as he turned his attention from painting to architecture. Like many others in the early Victorian era, he became a passionate advocate of Gothic as exemplifying an idealized medieval way of life in which Art was not separated from craft or artist from artisan. Ruskins chapter on “The Nature of Gothic” in The Stones of Venice (1854) was the single most influential document for the Arts and Crafts movement. Today it is especially remembered for its stirring condemnation of the division of labor: “It is not the labour that is divided, but the men,” whose individuality and creativity are destroyed (1985, 87). For Ruskin the division of labor meant a radical separation of the artist-designer from the artisan, often turning the craftsperson into little more than a machine operative. Moreover, industrial production had resulted in objects of an ugly uniformity compared to the beauty of craftworks, such as Venetian glass, which bear the variable marks of the human hand. His reappraisal of the importance of craftspeople and their fate under industrialism also led him to criticize the British government’s segregation of the fine and applied arts in separate museums and schools. By the 1870s he was describing the totality of arts as a continuum reaching from painting on china to painting on canvas, from the plowshare to the cathedral buttress, with no place to set a logical division. Moreover, he had become convinced that genuine art could have only two functions: “either to state a true thing, or to adorn a serviceable one” (1996,140).

William Morris, on whom “The Nature of Gothic” worked a kind of conversion as an Oxford student, was not only a respected poet and painter but also, once committed to restoring the dignity of the crafts, taught himself weaving, dying, stained-glass making, wallpaper and textile design, tile glazing, and bookbinding—-all with such energy and success as startled his contemporaries and made him the acknowledged leader of the Arts and Crafts movement

*Figure 66. William Morris, “Peacock and Dragon,” panel design produced by Morris & Co. (1875-1940). Wool, three-colored complementary weft, twill weave; lined with linen, plain weave, 217.5 X 171-7 centimeters. Restricted gift of Natalie Henry, 1985.74. © 2000, Art Institute of Chicago. All Rights Reserved.*

*[symbol/figure content not captured in text extraction]*

## The Arts and Crafts Movement

In Britain the Arts and Crafts movement had three facets: the many craft production workshops, the London design associations of the 1880s, and a social philanthropy effort aimed at using the craft revival to moralize the working class. Although one of the stated aims of the Arts and Crafts design societies was to restore the “unity of the Arts,” there was no intention of diminishing the designers’ claim to be gentlemen artists. The Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, for example, stipulated that no sales were to be made on the premises in order to avoid any appearance that the designers were “tradesmen” (Stansky 1985). Yet some of Morris’s spirit remained in the permission for designers to include the name of the actual maker of the work, although Morris remarked caustically that “it is not by printing lists of names in a catalogue that the status of the workman could be raised or the capitalist system altered” (Naylor 1990,123).

But Morris’s own firm hardly matched his ideal since there was often a division of labor between designer and executant, and he paid the prevailing wage while charging premium prices, once blurting out that he had to spend his time “ministering to the swinish luxury of the rich” (Naylor 1990,108). This was a general problem for most of the Arts and Crafts firms, even the ones that took up a kind of romantic socialism. Many of these reformers went off to a small village and set up a community of workers under the name of such and such “Guild” and scrupulously did their work with hand tools, allowed anyone of talent to be designers, and even shared the profits. But when these craft communities came to sell their products, like Morris & Co., it was mostly the well-to-do who could afford to buy.

Moreover, the Arts and Crafts movement at large often remained captive to gender prejudices. The London design guilds simply excluded women. And even when talented women designers became a majority in firms, such as in the Vienna Werkstatte, they were liable to be dismissed by critics such as Adolf Loos as “painting, embroidering, potting, precious-material-wasting daughters of senior civil servants, or other Lrauleins who regard handicrafts as something whereby one may earn pin-money or while away one’s spare time” (Schweiger 1984, 118). The communal craft workshops, by contrast, had many women members and several, such as Compton Pottery, were set up as womens enterprises. But in the movement as a whole, women tended to be directed to “womens” work, such as china painting or needle arts. Encouraging women to do needlework was especially marked in the philanthropic craft revival, which was aimed at keeping the working classes from drinking, gambling, and prostitution and also at providing “suitable employment” for unmarried middle-class women (Callen 1979; Anscombe 1984; Cumming and Kaplan 1991).

The irony of an Arts and Crafts movement aiming to create an “art by the people and for the people,” only to end up serving the rich and discriminating against women has led to plenty of dismissive remarks. But no later commentators have been harder on it than one of its own leaders, C. R. Ashbee: “We have made of a great social movement, a narrow and tiresome little aristocracy working with great skill for the very rich” (Naylor 1990, 9). Although communities such as Ashbee’s Guild of Handicraft, with its spirit of mutuality, its leisurely pace of work, its profit sharing, and its excursions and plays put on by the members, may not have transformed industrial society, they left a fertile example for reflection (Crawford 1985). Even so, the failure of the Arts and Crafts movement stemmed from its antimachine bias and nostalgia for a workshop form of production impossible to restore on a large scale. Morris, to his credit, gradually realized that the cause of the degradation of the artisan or craftsper-son was not just the machine but also the organization of industrial production. Later in his career, he joined the socialist movement, although his commitments to handicraft and social revolution remained in some tension (Thompson 1976).

Two overlapping artistic tendencies emerged from the Arts and Crafts movement by the beginning of the twentieth century (though each had other sources as well): one was the idea of total design, closely linking the decorative arts to architecture and industry; the other was the studio craft movement, with its small production potteries, weaving workshops, and furniture studios. Although many architects considered total design to mean they designed everything, including furnishings, and craftspeople simply carried out orders, architects such as Philip Webb and W. R. Lethaby in England or Gottfried Semper and Peter Behrens in Germany envisaged a more cooperative relationship between architects, artists, and craftspeople. Frank Lloyd Wright rejected Ruskin’s condemnation of the machine, but his prairie houses of 1893-1910 owed much to the Arts and Crafts idea of the integration of architecture and the crafts. Wright assembled a team that included the engineer Paul Mueller, the landscape architect Wilhelm Miller, the sculptor Richard Bock, the cabinetmaker George Niedecken, the mosaic designer Catherine Ostertag, the textile and stained-glass maker Orlando Giannini, and the delineator Marion L. Ma-hony (Frampton 1992). The charismatic Wright believed deeply in architecture as fine art, and he so successfully cultivated his image as genial artist-creator that the extent of his collaborators’ contributions often went unnoticed. But recent scholars have reminded us of the important role of his associates, for example, the presentation drawings and designs of Marion L. Mahony or the furniture designed and made by George Niedecken and company (Upton 1998; Robertson 1999) (fig. 67).

The other legacy of the Arts and Crafts movement, the studio craft workshops, continued Ruskin’s and Morris’ social utopianism and antimachine ethos, sometimes taking the form of a middle-class return to the simple life (Lucie-Smith 1984; Cumming and Kaplan 1991). In Britain and America, the studio craft movement offered a wider opportunity for women to establish independent careers, especially in ceramics where they made important contributions to both glaze technology and artistic form (fig. 68). Some women ran “production” potteries that created both functional and decorative ware (the Overbeck sisters), others maintained studios that specialized in the one-of-a-kind decorative pieces known as “art pottery” (e.g., Adelaide Robineau) (Postle 1978; Clark 1979). But pottery existed on the margins of the fine art world, its products classified as part of the “decorative” or “minor” arts. On the European continent, studio practice merged into the existing “art and industry” drive to inject good design into mass production. In 1896, the Prussian government sent Hermann Muthesius to England as a kind of cultural spy, and when he returned six years later, workshops were introduced into the arts and crafts schools and artists appointed as teachers. During the same period, small workshops producing furniture, pottery, and utensils came into being all over Germany. These workshops not only embraced machinery but newer design styles as well, such as the curvilinear Jugenstil (German art nouveau) or the minimalist, geometric forms we typically identify with modernism (fig. 69). In 1907, a Belgian exponent of art nouveau, Henry van de Velde, became head of the Grand-Ducal School of the Arts and Crafts in Weimar and in that same year joined several other artists, architects, and heads of craft firms—Bruno Paul and Peter Behrens, for example—to form the German Werkbund, the purpose of which was to promote the cooperation of “art, industry, and crafts” in order to assure “high quality” (Droste 1998,12). But the tension between the fine art and the craft emphases among the members became apparent in their 1914 meeting

*Figure 67. Frank Lloyd Wright, dining room, Susan Lawrence Dana Flouse, Springfield, Illinois (1902-4). Courtesy Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, Dana-Thomas House Collection, Springfield, Ill. Photograph by Douglas Carr. Although Wright was responsible for the overall design—with its flowing spaces and furnishings, including the fanciful “butterfly lamps”—other members of the team were involved in many parts of the house; George Niedecken designed the mural around the upper walls of the dining room, Walter Burley Griffin designed the sconce lamps, Marion Mahony designed the base of the fountain just outside the dining room, and Richard Bock did the fountain’s relief as well as the statue that is part of the front entry.*

*Figure 68. Mary Louise McLaughlin, Vase (1902); porcelain. Courtesy Cincinnati Art Museum, gift of the Porcelain League of Cincinnati. McLaughlin was a pioneer in developing glazing techniques and clay bodies, producing her porcelain “Losantiware” between 1899 and 1906.*

when Muthesius called for architecture and the applied arts to move toward industrial standardization and Henry Van de Velde riposted: “The artist is essentially a passionate individualist, a spontaneous creator [and] ... never will submit to a norm” (Conrads 1970, 29).

In the first decades of the twentieth century, despite the new respect for good design and the aesthetic appreciation given the best furniture, textiles, and utensils, the deeper art-versus-craft polarity continued to regulate thought and practice. There were still separate applied art museums (Europe) or separate departments for crafts in fine art museums (America) for what were called

*Figure 69. Josef*

Hoffmann and Carl Otto Czeschka, designers, tail-case clock, Wiener Werkstatte, Vienna (1906). Painted maple, ebony, mahogany, gilded brass, glass, silver-plated copper, clockworks, 179.5 X 46.5

X 30.5 centimeters.

Courtesy Laura Matthews and Mary Waller Langhorne funds, 1983.37.

Photograph by Robert Hashimoto. © 2000, Art Institute of Chicago.

All Rights Reserved. “decorative,” “applied,” or “minor” arts. The inclusion of costly decorative arts in American fine art museums was partly the result of a constant stream of gifts from “millionaire collectors in search of aristocratic identities” (Duncan 1995, 65). The term “craft,” although used for the studio-made item of clay, wood, glass, or metal, had an ambiguous status owing to its associations with such things as sewing, carpentry, or bricklaying.

Yet, as happened with photography, both formalist and expressionist arguments were already being used to assimilate exceptional instances of craft or applied art into fine art—but at a price. The Viennese historian Alois Riegl (1858-1905), for example, began his career as curator of textiles at the Austrian Museum of Art and Industry but used the collection to develop a revolutionary theory of ornament, according to which, style in art is not dependent on craft skills, materials, or function but on a universal “art impulse,” or “artistic will” (Kunstwollen). According to Riegl, the art drive develops progressively over time from tactile, or closely viewed, patterns toward the increasingly optical pleasures of a “redemptive” kind (Iversen 1993; Olin 1993,149). Paradoxically, Riegl believed that the applied arts sometimes reveal the “art will” of an epoch better than fine arts like painting, since representational content may obscure formal developments that are more obvious in ornamental patterns. Whereas Riegl’s older contemporary, the architect Gottfried Semper, made the crafts central to the history of architecture and tried to hold skill, function, and creativity together, Riegl’s approach ended up reinforcing their separation. In formalist theories similar to Riegl’s, the crafts or applied arts do have a place in art history or the museum but at the price of reducing skill, materials, and function to obstacles overcome by a universal “art impulse” (Riegl 1985, 9). Craft or applied art in the full sense of the purposeful work meant for the satisfactions of ordinary use and enjoyment remained the “other” of fine art.

Varied as they were, the resistance strategies of Emerson, Marx, Ruskin, Morris, the Arts and Crafts movement, and the German Werkbund were not the only challenges to the polarities of the fine art system in this period. Some of the other approaches to resistance against the division of art took a more traditional religious form, such as Soren Kierkegaard’s critique of the aesthetic mode of existence in the 1840s or Leo Tolstoy’s combined religious and social critique in the 1890s. But Kierkegaard’s writings remained relatively unknown outside Denmark and Tolstoy’s were greeted as the extremist outpourings of a crank—especially when he rejected his own novel War and Peace or Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony in favor of religiously edifying stories and wholesome folk music. But by the time Tolstoy’s What Is Art? ([1896] 1996) appeared, the worlds of music, literature, and visual arts were preoccupied with an internal issue that seemed far more important than overcoming fine art’s “separate and contrasted existence”: modernism.
