---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 5
chapter: 14
title: "Modernism, Anti-Art, and the Bauhaus"
source_pages: "246-268"
type: source
---

# Chapter 14: Modernism, Anti-Art, and the Bauhaus

## Modernism and Purity

lthough notoriously hard to define and date, the establishment of A. modernism is often identified with the period 1890 -1930, which witnessed a profound stylistic disruption of representational modes in painting (Picasso), traditional narrative techniques in the novel (Woolf), the standard tonal system in music (Schoenberg), classical balletic movements in the dance (Duncan), and traditional architectural forms (Le Corbusier) (fig. 70).1 If the characteristics and timing of modernism are hard to pin down, so are the larger social and cultural forces that fed into it. Many historians have seen modernism as an artistic response to the rapid industrialization and urbanization of the late nineteenth century, a profound social disruption that led to the paradoxical extremes of a belief in limitless progress and a growing sense of anomie. The horrors of World War I soon exploded the belief in progress but did not slow the pace of technological and social change or their disorienting effects. The poet T. S. Eliot caught the darkened mood of the postwar era in one of the defining works of modernist literature, The Waste Land: “Son of man ... you know only / A heap of broken images” ([1922] 1952, 38).

Among the many other catalysts of modernism was the discovery of the arts of cultures that had no idea of fine art as an autonomous realm. The assimilation of African ritual masks and fetish figures by Picasso (Les demoiselles d’Avignon, 1907), for example, has long been part of the legend of modernism, as has the earlier impact of Japanese prints on the postimpressionists. In music, an equally important moment was the discovery of exotic African and Asian rhythms at the Paris Exposition of 1889 (which also inaugurated the Eiffel Tower). Claude Debussy was excited by the sounds of the Javanese gamelan players and found their rhythmic counterpoint far more complex and subtle than anything in Western music up to then: “If we listen, forgetting our European prejudices ... we are forced to admit that ours sounds like the barbaric noise of a traveling circus” (Chanan 1994,227). Three years later, Debussy wrote one of the pioneer works of the transition to modern music, Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun.

*Figure 70. Le Corbusier, Villa Savoye, exterior, Poissy, France (1929-31). Courtesy Anthony Scibilia/Art Resource, New York. © 2000 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/AD AGP, Paris/FLC*

Yet modernism and its theorists did not radically alter the basic beliefs of the fine art system so much as encourage a shift of emphasis within them. Modernist experiments with abstraction, multiple points of view, and atonality helped finish off such secondary criteria for defining fine art as imitation and beauty, opening the way to their replacement by more complex versions of expressionist and formalist theories. To call something beautiful was coming to seem a weak compliment compared with descriptions such as “significant,” “complex,” and “challenging.” Now the ideal of creative vision was explicitly opposed to representation, function, and beauty.

There were innumerable varieties of expressionist theory, ranging from the naively causal notions of Tolstoy to the subtler idealist theories of Croce or Collingwood, who saw expression as the artist’s giving creative form to previously inchoate experiences. Expressionist theories of art obviously fit the early twentieth-century expressionist movement in music, painting, and architecture, but expressionist theories themselves were meant to explain all styles of art and in fact proved useful in describing a wide range of experimental works, as well as the newly discovered “primitive art.” In the early decades of the century, Croces expressionist philosophy of art, captured in the phrase “intuition equals expression” became widely influential (1992).

Formalist theories played a parallel role to expressionist ones and were sometimes combined with them, eventually gaining the upper hand in the 1950s. As a theory of art, formalism was already implicit in Kant’s and Schiller’s call for the disinterested contemplation of form, and in the 1850s, Eduard Hanslick argued that what makes music a fine art are its formal patterns of harmony and melodic structure. Music is something “self-contained and in no need of content from outside itself,” consisting “solely of tones and their artistic combination” (1986, 28). By the end of the nineteenth century, art historians such Riegl and Heinrich Wolfflin had developed a complex formalist approach to the visual arts, and critics such as Roger Fry and Clive Bell were soon defending postimpressionist and cubist painting, as well as “primitive” carvings, by arguing that what makes something art is the formal exploration of line, color, and composition, not representational content or beauty (Bell [1913] 1958). At about the same time that Bell was dismissing imitation and beauty in favor of “significant form,” the literary theorists and critics known as Russian formalists were arguing that what makes a poem or novel “literary” are its self-referential features of pattern, image, trope, and rhythm.

Although modernists produced a bewildering variety of manifestos and programs, one recurring motif was the special importance many ascribed to “purity” of medium, an exigency that “postmodernist” artists of our time have taken particular delight in violating. “Purity,” for early modernists, meant a drive to cleanse painting, music, or literature of everything extraneous to their essence. Yet purity did not necessarily mean an absolute formalism or a belief in art for art’s sake but could be combined with the established notion that Art reveals deeper truths inaccessible to science or discursive thought. Thus, Joyce’s Ulysses, Woolf’s To the Lighthouse, and Proust’s Remembrance of Things Past used experimental techniques to embody the texture of everyday experience and explore the deeper spiritual conflicts of modern life. The painters Kasimir Malevich and Wassily Kandinsky believed that abstraction could express the spiritual realm more aptly than representational styles, and the composer Arnold Schoenberg held onto the romantic conviction that pure music with no external reference reveals “a higher form of life towards which mankind evolves” (Schoenberg [1947] 1975,136; Kandinsky [1911] 1977) (fig. 71).

The purity-of-medium ideal was soon interpreted to mean that abstraction in painting, atonality in music, and experimentalism in literature were not just contingent stylistic possibilities but also the destiny of each of the fine arts.

*Figure 71. Kasimir Malevich, Black Rectangle, Blue Triangle (1915). Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam. Foto Marburg/Art Resource, New York.*

Schoenberg remarked in 1912 that when Kandinsky or Kokoschka painted pictures that seem to be “hardly more than an excuse to improvise in colors and forms” they expressed themselves “as only the musician expressed himself until now” and were part of a new movement that had discovered “the true nature of art” ([1947] 1975, 144)- Piet Mondrian caught this aspect of the modernist ethos with particular acuity in an essay of 1920: “At present each art strives to express itself more directly through its plastic means and seeks to free its means as much as possible. Music tends toward the liberation of sound, literature, toward the liberation of word ... painting ... expresses pure relationship” ([1920] 1986, 138). Henceforth, “true art” for most of the modernists was to be the “pure” art of abstraction or experimentalism; even so, not all artists interpreted it as art for art’s sake, but, like Mondrian, believed abstraction would unite all the fine and applied arts and lead to a better world.

Schoenberg s own contribution to the purist and experimentalist trends was a systematic assault on the traditional tonal system that had ruled European music for over three hundred years. By making each tone of equal importance, atonality eliminated the pull of a central key and the subordination of dissonance to consonance. This freeing of dissonance could be seen asithe musical equivalent of the garish colors and distorted shapes by which expressionist painters conveyed the turmoil and anguish of modern experience. In the after-math of World War I, Alban Berg produced the quintessential work of atonal expressionism with his opera Wozzeck (1917-20), which used ear-grating dissonance and unresolved tonalities to tell the story of a distraught soldier who murders his mistress and commits suicide.

The embrace of atonality and dissonance was only one among innumerable modernist innovations in music, as composers from Charles Ives to Bela Bartok explored new chromatics, structures, and rhythms. The most famous single work of the new music became Igor Stravinsky’s 1913 Rite of Spring, a ballet reenacting the sacrifice of maidens in prehistoric Russia. The cries and catcalls that greeted Stravinsky’s deafening “primitive” rhythms and the dancers’ disconcerting leaps almost stopped the performance. By 1920 Schoenberg, for his part, had adopted an even more abstract and systematic approach, known as serial-ism, or the twelve-tone method, in which each composition is made up of a series of twelve tones ordered according to strict procedures decided on before composition begins. In later developments of serialism by Anton von Webern and others, duration, intensity, timbre, and texture were also treated as elements for which order could be predetermined, affording the composer a sense of “total control.” To listeners brought up on the major-minor tonal system, the music produced by these highly rational techniques actually sounded random and meaningless. Serialism, more than other modernist experiments with tonality, timbres, and rhythms, was a pure, abstract music, which lent itself especially well to formalist justifications. Although Schoenberg himself continued to see abstract music as a revelation of the infinite, other modernist composers and critics took up more finite versions of formalist theory. In 1939, Stravinsky spoke of music very much as Hanslick had, calling it “a form of speculation in terms of sound and time” and denying such goals as expressing feelings or representing actions (1947,19, 79).

Although some critics and historians have trotted out the old chestnut of a heroic avant-garde rejected by the ignorant middle class, the reception of modern music has been much more complex. Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring, for example, had defenders not only in its first audience but was also generally well received by the critics and soon entered the classical repertory. The serialists had a harder time getting their music performed by established orchestras, and a deep split developed between the most abstract and experimental of the new composers and traditional audiences. Yet serialism was always considered part of “art music,” even by those who didn’t like it. Its problem was less one of assimilation into the category of fine art than of acceptance by the existing classical music audience. Even so, conductors began to insert “modern” pieces among the traditional baroque and romantic favorites, and people learned to take their modernist medicine with stoic silence and polite applause.

## The Case of Photography

If assimilation was a foregone conclusion in the case of abstract or experimental forms in music, painting, and literature, the assimilation of new arts such as photography, film, or jazz involved a constant fight against the perception that they were not fine arts at all but mere crafts or popular entertainments. As a result, the new versions of expressionist and formalist theories of art played an important role in the final stages of the assimilation of art photography, art film, and art jazz into high art. A good place to observe this process is to trace the drive for purity of medium and the shift from expressionist to formalist arguments in art photography between 1915 and 1940.

As we saw in the previous chapter, expressionist arguments had already played a key role in late nineteenth-century justifications for applying the fine art-versus-craft dichotomy within photography, and by the turn of the century a couple of museums had held exhibitions of pictorialist work. But early in the twentieth century, many art photographers turned against the pictorialist’s attempt to make photographs look like paintings and began to champion what they called pure or “straight photography,” rejecting both the arranged tableaux of Robinson and the manipulated prints of Steichen. The crisply focused and unaltered print was now claimed to be more artistic than posed, soft-focused, or retouched prints precisely because it was more purely “photographic” (Newhall, 1980,188). The arguments of many leading straight photographers were now emphatically formalist. In a 1923 lecture Paul Strand said the artist-photographer should respect the “instruments of form, texture and line possible and inherent in strictly photographic processes” (1981, 283) (fig. 72). That same year Edward Weston was photographing his glossy white enamel toilet and writing in his daybooks of his “excitement... about absolute aesthetic response to form” (1981, 305). Although European photographic modernists tended to emphasize experimental techniques such as the photomontage, they shared the Americans’ confidence in photography as art, a confidence many art photographers on

*Figure 72. Paul Strand, The White Fence, Port Kent, New York (1916). Silver gelatin print, 24.7 X 32.7 centimeters. Gift of the Paul Strand Foundation, 1983.954a. © 2000, Art Institute of Chicago. All Rights Reserved. Also © 1971, Aperture Foundation, Inc./Paul Strand Archive, Millerton, N.Y.*

both sides of the Atlantic expressed by proudly dismissing the fine art issue as irrelevant. Yet, as the European avant-garde increasingly turned its attention to social and political issues, many of them began to view formalism as elitist and politically retrograde. Karel Teige declared in a 1931 essay that “unpretentious documentation” has “a far superior cultural and social value than mere ‘art’” (Teige 1989, 321). But these outright refusals to be concerned with art status remained marginal compared to the fine art claims of the modernist majority, especially in the United States. Yet, the crisis of the Depression led many American art photographers, such as Walker Evans, for example, into documentary work for the government.

By the 1930s even the staid Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York had begun to accept photographs for its permanent collection. In 1937, the Museum of Modern Art mounted a big retrospective in anticipation of the hundredth anniversary of photography and, in 1940, named Beaumont Newhall curator of the first department of photography in a major American art museum. Newhall adopted three practices that were to dominate the American art museums’ assimilation of photography. First, he included in the collection many images originally made for scientific, journalistic, or governmental purposes, such as Charles Marville’s 1860s documentation of Paris streets, William Henry Jackson’s topographical views of the American West for the U.S. Survey, or the Civil War photographs taken by Mathew Brady’s studio. Second, each photograph, whatever its original intention or use, was treated as a single aesthetic object, matted, framed, and hung at eye level. Finally, Newhall adopted the art historian’s notion of a canon of masterpieces and geniuses, deftly combining expressionist, formalist, and purist arguments to justify the assimilation of utilitarian images: “From the prodigious output of the last hundred years relatively few great pictures have survived—pictures which are personal expressions of their maker’s emotions, pictures which have made full use of the inherent characteristics of the medium of photography. These living photographs are, in the fullest sense of the word, works of art” (Phillips 1989, 20).2

## Anti-Art

During the same 1936-38 period in which the Museum of Modern Art put on its photography retrospective, it also devoted exhibitions to cubism, abstraction, dada/surrealism, and the Bauhaus. Championing cubism and abstraction reflected the core of the museum’s original mission, as did its formalist embrace of photography and industrial design. But in reaching out to assimilate movements such as dada, surrealism, and the Bauhaus, which were deeply critical of, if not hostile to, established fine art assumptions, the museum also offered an exemplary case of the fine art system’s ability to appropriate the works of those who oppose it. Formalist art historians did their part by treating these movements as if they were simply particular styles or tendencies of modernist art, whereas many representatives of dada/surrealism and Russian constructivism had consciously attacked the institution of art as such (Burger 1984). Even granting that some adherents of dada or constructivism were still more or less under the spell of fine art ideals, the anti-art ethos had been a defining feature of both movements.

Dada began in Zurich in 1917 and soon spread to Berlin, Paris, and other cities as a protest against a war in which each side claimed to be defending their nation’s highest cultural values (Richter 1965). Dada borrowed many of its ideas and techniques from the Italian futurists’ wild pronouncements and activities of 1911-14, especially their poems of nonsense syllables, their “noise intoners” for music, and their provocative performance evenings, which assaulted all established values. But the futurists were not anti-art; they simply wanted an “art of the future,” as did some dadas. Among those in the anti-art wing of dada, Tristan Tzara was perhaps cleverest at provocation: “art—a parroRword—replaced by dada, plesiosaurus, or handkerchief” (Motherwell 1989,82). George Grosz, like other Berlin dadas, was more political in his hostility to art and remembers aiming his blow at “so-called sacred art which reflected upon cubes and gothic structures while the marshals were painting in blood” (Erickson 1984, 43). The brutal caricatures of George Grosz and the derisive photomontages of Hannah Hoch and John Heartfield were brilliant attacks on oppressive industrialists, militarists, and the rising fascist movement. Grosz s 1921 drawing At5 O’clock in the Morning shows, in its lower segment, some rich industrialists still out puking and whoring at the very hour a throng of workers, shown in the upper segment, trudge toward their factories. In a less political vein Marcel Duchamp s “readymades”—ordinary objects to which he affixed a title such as the snow shovel called In Advance of the Broken Arm—parodied the sacrosanct “work of art.” Man Ray came up with some memorable “assisted” readymades such as Gift, an ordinary flat iron with a row of tacks glued down the middle, their sharp points rendering it wittily useless and dreamily menacing (fig. 73). Yet most dadas, whether in Zurich, Paris, or New York, did not want to abolish art but to integrate it with life. “Art,” Tzara declared, “is not the most precious manifestation of life. Art does not have the celestial and universal value people like to attribute to it. . . . Dada introduces it into daily life, and vice versa” (Motherwell 1989, 248). Here again, the Berlin dadas were more radical, believing that the only way to reintegrate art and life was to place both at the service of the socialist revolution. In Paris, the surrealist successors of dada sometimes claimed theirs was not merely an art movement but a philosophy and a social revolt. They used the dream and unconscious not only as an art technique, as in Andre Bretons “automatic writing,” but as an instrument of social negation as well, calling the new journal they founded in 1930, La revolution surrealist.

But even as dada and surrealism challenged the modern system of fine art, they succumbed to its pervasive force (something realized by Marcel Duchamp, whose most famous readymade, Fountain, we will look at in the next chapter). Much of the normative view of the artist’s superior freedom and genius remained intact in both dadaistic and surrealist practice. With the exception of Sophie Taeuber-Arp and a few women surrealists who reached into the craft realm, the main effect of the turn to modernist experiments with chance, assemblage, and readymade images was to further separate the poet and artist as

*Figure 73. Man Ray, Gift (1921). ©2001, Man Ray Trust/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris.*

seer of the unconscious from the ordinary writer and craftsperson. Many of the surrealists, in particular, “proved incapable ... of relinquishing the modern ideal of art as an absolute value” (Wolin 1994,13?)■ In fact, the later recapture of dada and surrealism by art and literary history and by the art museum was already foreshadowed by its first audiences. As the critic Albert Gliezes wrote of Paris dada in 1920, the audience was “composed of curiosity seekers and of highly Parisian boulevardiers, the arbiters of artistic fashion for snobbish circles. These elements are in quest of the ‘modern direction’” (Motherwell 1989, 302).

If the provocations of Tzara seem merely naughty and those of Breton overly esoteric, the anti-art declarations of the Russian constructivists were potentially of greater social importance, given constructivism’s roots in marxist theory and its opportunity to help build a new society. Russian constructivism, of the revolutionary period (which should be distinguished from the stylistic constructivism Naum Gabo took to the West) was a combination of the pre-1917 idea that the artwork should be a nonrepresentational construction and the post-1917 idea that artists should become constructors of the new socialist society. In 1913, Vladimir Tatlin took a decisive step toward the general constructivist position when he returned from a trip to Picasso s studio and began to make painterly reliefs that soon turned into three-dimensional constructions of wood, metal, glass, and wire. The spell of painting was broken and “construction” had taken its place for artists such as Aleksandr Rodchenko, Vavara Stepanova, and Lyubov Popova, who combined it with socialist commitment to become leaders of the First Working Group of Constructivists. One of their early manifestos declared:

1. Down with art, long live technical science.

2. Religion is a lie. Art is a lie.

3. Destroy the last remaining attachment of human thought to art....

6. The collective art of today is constructive life.

(Elliot 1979,130; Lodder 1983, 94-99) And what should take the place of “art”? Construction. One should simply participate in producing a useful object. Tatlin made his famous architectural model for a gigantic, revolving steel and glass government complex, Monument to the Third International, Stepanova and Popova produced extraordinary abstract clothing and textile designs, and Rodchenko designed photomontage posters, workers uniforms, and furniture (fig. 74). Yet the early constructivists also firmly distinguished what they were doing from both handicraft and applied art—from handicraft since virtuosity with brush or chisel was to be replaced by precision design and machine tools, from applied art since construction was a matter of total design not the decoration of an existing object (Elliott 1979; 130).

Outside Russia, the Berlin dadas—Grosz and Heartfield, for example—immediately understood the constructivist s intentions and put up a sign at the 1920 Berlin Dada Fair that said “art is dead: the machine art of tatlin lives.” But already in 1922 the Van Diemen Gallery in Berlin presented a First Russian Art Exhibition in which Russian constructivism was treated as just another modernist art style. A member of the Moscow group attacked this kind of

*Figure 74. Lyubov Popova, textile design (1924). As reproduced in Left Front of the Arts, vol. 2, no. 2 (1924).*

appropriation, lamenting the failure of even some Russians to tear themselves away from art” (Lodder 1983, 238). Unfortunately for the constructivists, neither their modernist experimentalism nor their antiromantic attacks on Art survived the triumph of Stalin. Although Lenin had no understanding or sympathy for modernism and avant-garde experimentalism, his minister of education and culture, Anatoly Lunacharsky, let all styles flourish in the early 1920s. But by the time Stalin had consolidated his power in 1934, the theory of “socialist realism” (socialist in content, realist in style) had been worked out and was imposed by the Communist Party. Party leaders were even suspicious of experiments in “proletarian art” and felt safer supporting conformist versions of high art genres, such as oil painting, opera, and ballet. In such an atmosphere, neither modernist styles (denounced as “formalism”) nor talk of anti-art had much appeal to the party bureaucrats who took over the art and music schools and controlled what got shown, performed, and published. \

## The Bauhaus

Although not an anti-art movement, the Bauhaus school of architecture, art, and crafts (1919-32) also resisted the established fine art system by trying to reunite art and craft and restore art’s social purpose. The Bauhaus was created by Walter Gropius, who combined the Weimar School of Fine Arts with its School of Arts and Crafts in 1919, the new name deriving from the Bauhiitte, the medieval mason’s guilds. Founded during the political and economic turmoil following Germany’s defeat in World War I, the ideas and practices of the Bauhaus remained suspect to both traditional artists and political conservatives. Gropius’s 1919 manifesto for the new school is worth citing at length since it not only announced the ideal of overcoming the art-versus-craft division but also reflected the inherent difficulty of the task:

Architects, sculptors, painters, we must all turn to the crafts.. .. There is no essential difference between the artist and the craftsman. The artist is an exalted craftsman. In rare moments of inspiration, moments beyond the control of his will, the grace of heaven may cause his work to blossom into art. But proficiency in his craft is essential to every artist. Therein lies a source of creative imagination. Let us create a new guild of craftsmen, without the class distinctions, which raise an arrogant barrier between craftsman and artist. Together let us create a new building of the future. (Naylor 1968, 50) Gropius’s statement nicely captures the existing division between the ideal of the artist’s superiority as imaginative genius, creating self-contained works, and the craftsperson’s skill and knowledge of materials in the service of functional demands. By italicizing “proficiency in craft is essential to every artist,” Gropius showed he knew how difficult it would be to get aspiring artists to accept the humble role of learning craft skills and working cooperatively on functional design and construction (Forgacs 1991). Even the school’s organization reflected this tension since the workshops were presided over by two instructors, the form teacher, who taught design, and the practice teacher, who taught materials and craft skills. Thus, in the first weaving workshop a young painter, Georg Muche, was made form teacher whereas weaving techniques were taught by Helene Borner, retained along with her looms from the previous arts and crafts school.

Yet Gropius’s primary aim was not to turn out skilled craftspeople but to draw art, craft, and technology together in the training of designers and architects. After a few years, each workshop had only a single artist-designer as teacher, usually drawn from Bauhaus graduates who had imbibed the original ideal of the artist-craftsman-designer (Gropius 1965). Gropius managed to attract such already well-known artists as Lyonel Feininger, Wassily Kandinslcy, Paul Klee, and Theo van Doesburg, as well as younger people, such as Josef and Anni Albers, Herbert Bayer, Marcel Breuer, and Lazio Moholoy-Nagy, who would become well known. Some of the artists never gave up a sense of their superiority and autonomy, but others—Breuer and Moholy-Nagy, for instance—became dedicated exponents of Gropius’s aim of uniting art, craft, and technology in the service of society. Thanks to Gropius’s combination of diplomacy and firmness, students not only imbibed modernist artistic theory from van Doesburg, Kandinsky, and Klee, but they also learned practical skills and the nature of materials in the textile, pottery, metalworking, and furniture shops prior to the final courses in architecture. When the Bauhaus was forced to move to Dessau in 1926, Gropius designed the main building in a severe modernist style and furnished it with chairs, tables, and light fixtures designed and made in Bauhaus workshops (fig. 75). Eventually, more and more modernist Bauhaus designs, such as Breuer’s famous tubular chairs, Marianne Brandt’s lamps, and Gunta Stolzl’s textiles, won praise in international competition and were adopted for industrial production. The long-term result, if not exactly Morris’s “art of the people for the people,” was furniture, utensils, and fixtures that were of exceptional modern design and sold at more affordable prices than the handmade productions of arts and crafts guilds (Whitford 1984) (fig. 76).

By the time Gropius resigned as director in 1928 to pursue his own architectural work, the Bauhaus was the leading center for modernism in design and was poised to become a leader in architectural education as well. To understand what happened next at the Bauhaus, we need to look at the general debate among architectural modernists over the implications of such new materials as steel, aluminum, glass, and reinforced concrete. Some modernists viewed the new industrial materials primarily as providing the architect with opportunities for artistic expression, whereas others saw the new materials as an opportunity to design badly needed affordable housing and healthier factories and schools. Thus, both the art and function aims of architecture now took on a special coloring from their association with the new technologies. When Louis Sullivan, coined the famous phrase “form follows function” in the 1890s, he meant the shaping of new materials and techniques to serve human needs. But when Le Corbusier celebrated function in 1923, he understood it in a more technological

*Figure 75. Walter*

*[symbol/figure content not captured in text extraction]*

*Figure 76. Marcel Breuer, chair, model B32 (ca. 1931). Courtesy Victoria and Albert Museum, London/Art Resource, New York.*

If Gropius’s educational and design work at the Bauhaus up to 1928 was guided by a vision of keeping art and function in equilibrium, his successor, Hannes Meyer, went to the functionalist and technological extreme: “Building is a technical, not an aesthetic process, and time and again the artistic composition of a house has contradicted its practical function” (Kruft 1994, 386). Meyer’s architectural views combined an austere modernist style with a commitment to teaching students to design in a “functional-collectivist-constructive” manner (Droste 1998, 166). By 1930 Meyer was fired for his socialist views and replaced by the apolitical Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who shifted the Bauhaus curriculum toward pure architectural theory and design, eliminating the craft workshop requirement and turning the shops into design studios. Although Mies emphasized the technological determinants of architecture and the need for unornamented designs, he had a refined sense of form and a preference for fine materials that always gave his buildings a subtle aesthetic dimension. While Meyer called architecture simply Building (Bauen), Mies called it Art-Building (Baukunst), and whereas Meyer gave students design problems defined by specific social needs, Mies’s problems were pure design tasks with few specifications. In Mies’s Bauhaus teaching “architecture was art, confrontation with space, proportion and material” (Droste 1998, 212-14). And so the Bauhaus itself, founded to unite art and craft, the aesthetic and the functional, spent its last four years swinging wildly between the poles of art divided.

Meanwhile, Hitler and the Nazis had begun their march to power by exploiting the resentments and discontents of a defeated nation now suffering from the Great Depression. As German writers, painters, and composers soon discovered, Hitler hated modernist art in all its forms. The Nazis later staged a now infamous exhibition of “Degenerate Art” (1937) and attacked modernist literature and music, favoring the “German” music of Wagner. In architecture, Hitler ordered monumental neoclassical works with hundreds of columns for his public buildings, whereas in housing the Nazis supported a traditional German folk look. One of the Nazi’s first political conquests on the way to seizing total power was a 1931 electoral victory in the city of Dessau, where they promptly began harassing the Bauhaus and finally closed it in 1932. Mies van der Rohe tried to revive it as a private school in Berlin, but it was hardly underway in 1933 when Hitler came to power and the police shut it down.

Many Bauhaus teachers, including Gropius, Moholy-Nagy, and Mies Van der Rohe eventually emigrated to the United States, where they had a great influence (Gropius 1965). Despite Gropius’s pronouncements and the example of the Bauhaus experiments in reuniting art and craft in the 1920s, the later modernist design and architecture movements in America and Europe could not overcome the separation of the designer (artist) and the maker (artisan). As serially produced functional items for commercial distribution, design products remained part of the lesser arts even when taken into places like the Museum of Modern Art. The textiles, chairs, and lamps in these museums are seldom exhibited as the work of those who actually produced them or because they successfully fulfilled their function but as examples of formal stylistic development or the expressive genius of the artist-designer. Like the very different movements of dada/surrealism and Russian constructivism, the Bauhaus ideal and practice had combined modernism with a drive to overcome the separation of art from everyday life. By ensuring the triumph of modernism and functionalism in the design of everyday objects, the Bauhaus came closer to its goals of reuniting art and everyday life than did dada or Russian constructivism. Yet all three movements were eventually assimilated by formalist art history and the art museum as styles and theories of art in ways that neutralized their protest against the isolation of art. Three Philospher-Critics on the Division of Art I want to conclude these remarks on the processes of assimilation and resistance in the early years of modernism by looking briefly at three philosopher-critics who went beyond the internal problems generated by modernism to address directly the underlying art-versus-craft division in the 1930s: the British idealist R. G. Collingwood, who sought to reinforce the division, the American pragmatist John Dewey, who sought to dissolve it, and the German-Jewish mystic and marxist Walter Benjamin, who sought to transcend it. Their thought can only be adequately understood, however, if we keep in mind that European culture, traumatized by the slaughter of World War I and the revolutionary after-math that brought fascism to Italy and communism to Russia, was again deeply shaken in the 1930s by the Great Depression and the rise of Hitler and Stalin. In such a climate, many artists and critics in both Europe and the Americas turned away from modernist abstraction and experimentalism toward representational styles they thought would be better able to carry a political message.

Collingwood’s defense of the fine art-versus-craft division in his writings of the 1920s and 1930s is particularly interesting for our purposes since he explicitly recognized that the modern fine art-versus-craft polarity only goes back to the eighteenth century, prior to which the word “art” meant something closer to “craft” and artists thought “of themselves as craftsmen” (1938, 6). Collingwood’s task was complicated because he wanted not only to support modernism’s struggle against representation but also to expose the error of thinking that genuine art could serve a political purpose (he complained of “our young writers” pursuing “the propaganda ... of communism”) (1938, 71). Collingwood was convinced that most people mistakenly took representational or utilitarian craftworks, such as portraits or hymns, to be art rather than understanding art in its “proper” aesthetic meaning. Craft, according to Collingwood, is any work that deliberately uses a technique (such as representation) to achieve a specific effect on its audience. Representational arts, whether patriotic songs, landscapes, or moralistic poetry such as Kipling’s, aim at generating specific emotions that will be useful in practical life. In addition to these “magically” useful crafts, Collingwood also excluded from art such “amusement” crafts as detective stories, dance music, radio shows, and films—which aim at arousing emotions simply for diversion. In contrast to both the useful and amusement crafts, true art is an act of imaginative expression requiring interpretive understanding. Unlike the craft maker who aims at a preconceived result, the true artist does not know in advance the outcome of the process of discovery and creation (1930). Despite appearances, Collingwood’s restatement of the regulative assumptions of fine art does not really consign entire media or genres to the realm of craft; what makes something either craft or art is the way artists engage the medium. Although Collingwood seemed to regard most films as amusement or propaganda crafts since they employ techniques to achieve a specific effect, his theory would allow the possibility that a true artist might use the medium of film for imaginative self-discovery and creation. Yet the price Collingwood s expressionist theory pays for this openness to selective assimilation into “art proper” is of the same kind as formalist theories: the demotion of specific function and the depreciation of technique.

At the same time that Collingwood was exposing what he took to be the error of mistaking craft for art proper, John Dewey was vigorously attacking the separation of the fine and useful arts and the separation of art and life generally: “To institute a difference of kind between useful and fine arts is ... absurd ... the only basic distinction is that between bad art and good art, and this ... applies equally to things ofuse and ofbeauty” ([1925] 1988, 282-83). Like Collingwood, Dewey defended modernism, and he specifically rejected the idea of a “proletarian art” then coming out of the Soviet Union (1934, 344). But unlike Collingwood, he wanted not only to include in art the conventional applied and popular arts but to identify an “art” dimension in everyday activities from sewing and singing to gardening and sports. The key to Dewey’s effort to reunite art and the everyday was his reframing of the idea of the aesthetic to make it a dimension of all human experience rather than a separate kind of experience. The core of any memorable experience for Dewey is a feeling of harmony after disequilibrium and the only thing distinguishing aesthetic experience from other kinds of experience is that the aesthetic is a particularly integrated and consummate moment of such harmony. Although all the arts from cooking to the canvas afford a degree of aesthetic or integrative experience, “the fine arts lay hold of this fact and push it to its maximum of significance” (1934, 26, 195). Dewey emphasizes that utility need not interfere with having an aesthetic experience of harmony after imbalance; the person who uses a tea cup is not prevented from enjoying its aesthetic aspect anymore than the fisherman who eats his catch is prevented from enjoying the aesthetic pleasure of the cast (1934, 1.3-15, 46-56, 261). True art is “simultaneously instrumental and consumma-tory,” and anytime we divide art into useful and fine we “destroy its intrinsic significance” ([1925] 1988, 271). One practical outcome of Dewey’s effort to unite the fine and useful arts was the way his wealthy friend, Albert Barnes, hung his collection of finely shaped barn hinges among the world-class modernist paintings in his private museum in Pennsylvania.

Although Dewey clearly established a continuity between fine art and craft by allowing that any useful object may afford an aesthetic experience, there are other passages in Art as Experience that downplay both craft skill and specific use. Sometimes he sets up a dichotomy between “mere utility,” in which we are “indifferent to the object itself,” and aesthetic experience, in which we are indifferent to use. The “work of esthetic art... serves life rather than prescribing a defined and limited mode of living” (1934, 135). Dewey’s effort to overcome the fine art-versus-useful art polarity falters at this point. Rather than locate the aesthetic dimension of useful objects in their use in the normal sense of the word—which means in their specific functions—Dewey, like Emerson, often located aesthetic quality in a metaphoric “use” for “life purposes.” Although Dewey grants function, technique, and materiality a more positive role in the arts than either Riegl’s formalist or Collingwood’s expressionist theories, his position on the useful arts was finally ambiguous. Even so, Dewey remains a key figure for the tradition of resistance, and there has been a revival of interest in his attempt to reconstruct the concepts of art and the aesthetic (Shuster-man 2000).

In the late 1920s and early 1930s, Walter Benjamin lived through Germany’s devastating inflation, unemployment, and political violence, his only income from writing reviews. After the Nazis seized power, he went to Paris, where he received a small stipend from the German Institute for Social Research, by then in exile in America. Benjamin’s early literary studies and speculations had been informed by the Jewish mystical tradition, but by 1930 he had been drawn toward a materialist perspective—although he never gave up his religious utopianism. His often cited and anthologized essay of 1936, “The Work of Art in an Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” argues that until the age of mass media, the work of art possessed an “aura.” In the Middle Ages and Renaissance, its aura was a religious one, derived primarily from what it represented; in the early modern period, the work of art was gradually secularized, its ritual aura becoming the aesthetic aura of the unique self-contained work, a kind of religion of Art. But in the twentieth century, the aura of the singular work of art had in turn been diminished by the new mass media of photography, film, and the audio recording, which produced cheap, multiple copies. Benjamin goes on to suggest that these new media are the crucial art forms of the twentieth century because they free art from its aesthetic isolation and allow art to perform a political and informational function in daily life (1969, 217-52).

Benjamin’s enthusiastic embrace of the mass media and his rejection of the autonomous artwork have been widely criticized, starting with Theodor Adorno.4 But many of Benjamins other writings are more open ended than the occasionally heavy-handed marxism of his most famous essay. In “The Storyteller,” for example, he claims that storytelling by peasants, artisans, and merchants in preindustrial society was a craft growing out of personal experience and carrying the traditional wisdom of proverbs. But the coming of print gradually diminished the role of personal storytelling so that genres such as the novel, with its lone artist-writer and solitary readers, began to take the place of storytelling. Benjamin describes the craft of the storyteller with an evident nostalgia, and Bernd Witte has suggested we connect it to Benjamin’s admiration for the “worker-correspondents” who flourished in the Soviet Union before they were eliminated under Stalin (Witte 1991). According to Benjamin’s essay “The Author as Producer,” in the figure of the worker-correspondent “the distinction between author and public” begins to disappear and “the reader is always ready to become a writer.” Writing ceases to be a specialist art and becomes an everyday practice (1986, 225). In 1940 Benjamin fled the advancing German armies to the Spanish border; when his group was detained, he feared he would be captured and committed suicide. Although Benjamin never had a chance to reconcile the mystical and materialist sides of his thinking about art in the age of mechanical reproduction, many have found his essays among the most suggestive twentieth-century texts for reflecting on art divided.

## Modernism and Formalism Triumphant

After World War II, the art worlds of music, literature, and painting returned to the internal struggles of modernism. Although existentialism in France provided a focus for a socially concerned literature of an intensely individual type, in the United States, the preoccupation with social issues and the use of representational styles fell quickly into disfavor in both literature and painting as modernist experimentation revived and triumphed, thanks partly to lessons learned during the 1940s from the many European exiles. Paralleling this shift in the arts themselves, formalist theories gained ascendance among critics of literature (Cleanth Brooks), the visual arts (Clement Greenberg), and aestheti-dans (Monroe Beardsley). Fundamental explorations of the underlying fine art-versus-craft and art-versus-society divisions of the kind raised by Colling-wood, Dewey, and Benjamin faded into the background along with the socially conscious art, literature, and music of the 1930s and the war years. In the visual arts, some critical supporters of the abstract expressionism of Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning were prepared to deny that realist works were really art at all. In literary criticism and literature departments, the formalist movement called the New Criticism now became dominant, and students were encouraged to focus on detailed internal analysis of poems or novels rather than biographical origins or political implications. Leaders of the musical avant-garde, such as Pierre Boulez, were ready to dismiss tonal composers as useless, and Milton Babbitt made a virtue of modernist music’s tiny audience in a famous essay of 1958, “Who Cares If You Listen?” (Schwartz and Childs 1998).

In the 1950s, modernism and formalism got an unexpected boost from the Cold War. With the memory of Hitler and the Nazis still fresh and with Stalin’s culture minister Andrei Zhdanov once again publicly condemning “formalism” as a sign of capitalist “decadence,” modernism and formalism now carried the cachet of antitotalitarianism. Acting as surrogate for the U.S. government, the Museum of Modern Art supported traveling exhibitions of abstract expressionist painting as a sign of America’s creative freedom and artistic leadership in contrast to the communist bloc’s censorship and stagnation. In West Germany, the annual Documenta exhibition of contemporary art, inaugurated in Cassel in 1956, declared on its posters: “Abstract Art is the idiom of the free world.” Meanwhile, in Darmstadt a series of now legendary “summer courses for new music” had been going on since 1946) which drew an international following among avant-garde composers, including Pierre Boulez, Luciano Berio, and Karlheinz Stockhausen. The early Darmstadt participants could not help but be conscious of the Soviet condemnation of formalism in music since it was reiterated by the Central Committee of the Communist Party in 1948, the year of the Berlin blockade and Allied airlift. It is no surprise, then, that one of the leading philosophers to write on musical aesthetics, Theodor Adorno, would champion serialism against both Western popular music ( the capitalist entertainment industry”) and the tonal music favored by both American symphony audiences and the “vulgar marxists” of Eastern Europe. Yet, as Karol Berger has pointed out, when Stalin died in 1955, the ruling parties of Communist countries such as Poland realized that modernist abstraction in music was politically harmless. At the same time, the West European musical avant-garde was settling “into the comfortable role of . . . combining official support with the flattering self-image of antibourgeois subversiveness,” whereas the American musical avant-garde was “settling into tenured positions in the universities” (Berger 2000,147).

By the mid-1950s, New York had become the world mecca fonthe arts, and American composers, writers, and artists were on the way to becoming international celebrities. At the same time, programs in university departments of literature, music, and theater and schools of fine art expanded and enrollments soared. In the visual arts, there were new majors in media like ceramics, weaving, photography, and film, which most people had previously learned by apprenticeship or in commercial schools. The more general process of assimilating new genres and new arts into fine art institutions now operated in an expansive and optimistic social/economic environment. In 1964, art in the United States received a major public consecration with the creation of the National Endowment for the Arts, followed by an unprecedented expansion in the number of galleries, museums, symphonies, dance and theater companies, arts festivals, literary journals and prizes, and local and state arts councils. Art had finally been publicly recognized in a country that had never placed investment in culture among its highest priorities. In fact, the rhetoric of art’s elevated place in life was such that a reaction came from within the art world itself in the form of pop art, especially Andy Warhol’s send-up of hallowed notions like “originality” with his silkscreen images derived from publicity or news photos and calling his studio—where assistants often did much of the work—“The Factory.” Of course, with the exception of a few diehard formalists such as Clement Greenberg, all this only made Warhol’s reputation as an artist that much bigger. Yet the underlying fine art-versus-craft polarity continued to distort the production and reception of the arts, now complicated by the processes of assimilation and resistance. My concluding chapter will look at a few examples from the past half-century.
