---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: 5
chapter: 15
title: "Beyond Art and Craft?"
source_pages: "269-301"
type: source
---

# Chapter 15: Beyond Art and Craft?

Invited to the Telluride Film Festival in 1977 to show her film Kitch’s Last Meal, Carolee Schneemann was provoked to “step out of frame” and confront her audience directly. Taking off her clothes and applying stripes of mud to her body, she slowly began to unravel a scroll from her vagina, reading as she went. It described a confrontation with a filmmaker who complains of her film’s “personal clutter . . . hand-touch sensibility . . . diaristic indulgence.” Known as Interior Scroll, Schneemann’s performance raised issues on several levels—of womens identity as creators and procreators, the place of personal experience in making art, and the locus of wisdom in the body. Like much performance art of the 1970s, Interior Scroll was also intended to overcome what Schneemann called “the distancing of audience perception,” the passive looking, listening, or reading that so often occurs with film, music, or literature (Sayre 1989, 90).

Although the arts since 1970 have been characterized by a pluralism that de fies generalization, it is fair to say that one major trend of the past thirty years has tried to reintegrate art with life, from the intimately personal to the broadly political. Yet, like a compulsive who must repeat the same actions over and over, Western culture has seemed unable to stop repeating the kind of division by which it originally split art into fine art versus craft and segregated art from the rest of society. But this continued division has also been entangled with the processes of assimilation and resistance, which, in their different ways, have tended to undermine it. In this chapter, I will examine some of the paradoxes and distortions resulting from this interplay between the art-versus-craft division and the processes of assimilation and resistance. I will look at these effects in relation to “primitive” or “tribal” art, the “crafts-as-art” movement, the tension between “art” and “function” in architecture, the photography-as-art boom, the fear of a “death of literature,” the debate over mass music and film, the varied art-world gestures toward getting art and life back together, and some controversial works of public art.

## “Primitive” Art

At the beginning of the twentieth century, European artists from Paris to Moscow became fascinated with everything “uncivilized”: the arts of children, naive amateurs, the mentally ill, peasant folk, “primitive” peoples.1 Although “primitive art” was securely assimilated into fine art institutions by midcentury, in the 1980s attacks on the patronizing implications of the term “primitive” were so successful that it has almost disappeared from museum facades and book covers (Fabian 1983; Clifford 1988; Torgovnick 1990). In 1983, when I first visited Phoenix’s Heard Museum devoted to Southwest Indian arts, the words “Anthropology * Primitive Art” were still affixed to the front wall; by 1991 not only had they been taken down but, in addition, the museum itself presented an exhibition called Exotic Illusion: Art, Romance, and the Market Place that raised questions about the appropriation of native artifacts as art.

Yet abolishing politically incorrect terminology may only create the illusion that we have changed our thinking by substituting one word for another.2 Some well-meaning critics believe they can simply drop the term “primitive” as invidiously ethnocentric but keep “art” as complimentary and universal and still talk of ethnographic objects being “elevated to the status of a work of art” (Price 1989,68). Yet this elevation has usually tended to promote only those things that fit European ideas of fine art, while relegating the rest to the status of craft, even though no such division existed within the cultures of origin. A State Arts Council representative in Alaska, for example, had to explain constantly to Alaskan Inuits in the 1980s that ivory carving and beadwork could be supported “as art” but not kayak or harpoon making (Jones 1986). What seems a natural division between art and craft to us appears merely arbitrary to those not fully acculturated to the Euro-American system of art. The art-versus-craft polarity appears to impose the following alternative: either we force the arts of these societies into an alien mold of (fine) art or we appear to denigrate them as mere crafts. To avoid the negative ethnocentrism of relegating the music, dance, or carvings we admire to the status of craft, we embrace the positive ethnocentrism of assimilating them into fine art. But to take African or Polynesian masks out of their ritual context, cut them from their costumes, and enshrine them in Plexiglas cases for our Sunday contemplation will only seem an inevitable “elevation” to those who place “art for itself” at the apex of values (figs. 77, 78).

Nowhere is the failure to rethink the “art” in the phrase “primitive art” or “tribal art” more revealing than in the alarm over “primitive fakes” and the contempt for “tourist art.” Almost as soon as Europeans and Americans began collecting the artifacts and recording the music and dances of small-scale soci-Figure 77. Baga people, headdress (Nimba), mid-nineteenth to early twentieth century; wood, residue from metal tacks, 119.4 X 33 X 61 centimeters. W. G. Field Fund, Inc., and E. E. Ayer Endowment in memory of Charles L. Hutchinson, 1957.160. Photograph © 2000, Art Institute of Chicago. All Rights Reserved. To see a similar headdress worn with a costume in its original context, compare figure 78 on the following page.

eties as Art, people in those societies adapted to the new opportunities. Today, the performance of ritual dances and music or the production of carvings, weavings, and pottery for outsiders has become a major source of income for many communities (Jules-Rosette 1984). But because of the fine art prejudice against trade, Europeans and Americans are disdainful of anything performed or made for money, wanting only what they define as authentic. “Authentic”

usually means only those things that have been made in an inherited style to serve a traditional purpose, whereas things made to be sold to outsiders are scorned as fakes, tourist art, or craft kitsch. In African art galleries one sometimes finds penciled onto the price tag of a mask not only a designation of “tribe” but also the phrase “has been danced.” What is conceptually interesting

*Figure 78. Baga people, Nimba headdress with costume. Photograph from Andre Arcin, Histoire de la Guinee frangaise (Paris: A Challamel, 1911). This posed picture, taken before the days of widely available stop-action photography, does not convey the dynamism of the costumed figure in action as part of a ceremony that included drumming, dancing, and chanting in a dramatic ritual involving a crowd of participants.*

about this attitude is that carvings not intended to be “art” in our sense but made as functional objects are considered “authentic tribal art,” whereas carvings intended to be “art” in our sense—that is, made to be appreciated and acquired primarily for their appearance—are reduced to the status of craft. In the context of the “tribal art” market, the traditional European fine art-versus-craft distinction undergoes a paradoxical reversal. The utilitarian artifacts are elevated to the status of art and the nonutilitarian artifacts are relegated to the category of craft.

Of course, there is an important difference between a mask or power figure carved for sale to outsiders and the rich associations of pieces used in ceremonies. But it is not the difference between art and craft. The spiritual meanings of carvings made for specific ritual uses are not the same as the spirituality we ascribe to fine art. A Baule carver produces a fearsome helmet mask to be worn in dances to protect his village, but once the mask is isolated in the art museum case, photographed for the coffee-table book, or wrapped in the modern discourse of art, it enters a different system of meanings. Tales of its rich associations may provide a shiver of excitement for the jaded art viewer, but the mask has become, as Quatremere said of altarpieces wrenched from Italian churches for the Louvre, only art.3

There are signs that the distorting effects of the art-versus-craft division are becoming more widely recognized. Although some museums continue their jewelry case displays, others such as the Heard Museum, in the 1991 exhibition mentioned above, have more directly addressed the differences between the European fine art system and the socially integrated art/craft traditions of other cultures. Susan Vogel’s exemplary 1997 exhibition Baule: African Art Western Eyes was so effective in contextualizing objects and raising the issue of difference that some critics complained it felt like an anthropology exhibit (Vogel 1997). Native peoples themselves have sometimes overcome outsiders’ attempts at “elevation,” such as the Zuni, who forced the Denver Art Museum to return their Ahauuta (war gods), or the Kwagiulth of the northwest coast, who have gathered their artifacts into cultural museums organized on different principles than the typical Euro-American art museum (Clifford 1988,1997). Even within more traditional art museums Native American voices are making themselves heard. The following statement by Michael Lacapa, who is of mixed Apache, Hopi, and Tewa heritage, accompanied an exhibit at the Museum of Indian Arts and Culture in Santa Fe—a new kind of museum where Native Americans help shape the research, education, and exhibition activities.

What do we call a piece of work created by the hands of my family? In my home we call it pottery painted with designs to tell us a story. In my mother’s house, we call it a wedding basket to hold blue corn meal for the groom’s family. In my grandma s place we call it a Kachina doll, a carved image of a life force that holds the Hopi world in place. We make pieces of life to see, touch, and feel. Shall we call it “Art?” I hope not. It may lose its soul. Its life. Its people.4

In Africa and the Pacific, many of the small-scale societies in which traditional arts are still produced have for decades been part of new nation-states, the rapid modernization of which has steadily undermined the social and religious context of traditional arts. Some African nations fund art schools and museums patterned on European models even as they try to prevent their cultural heritage from disappearing into an insatiable world-art market. Traditional masks and carved figures have become collectors’ items for the African upper class, and some governments now seek traditional carvers to reproduce ritual pieces for national museums. But at the same time that traditional carving, music, and ritual are disappearing or being transformed into hybrid genres, many urbanized African painters, sculptors, musicians, and^writers successfully compete in the international market using the latest genres and styles. Like many Native American artists who resent the tendency of whites to stereotype them as “Indian artists,” African painters and sculptors see themselves simply as artists working within the global fine art or popular art systems (Oguibe and Enzwezor 1999). Meanwhile, many dealers, galleries, and museums in Europe and America not only have continued to show a preference for traditional ritual carvings but have also begun to assimilate pieces of contemporary African functional and folk art—from coffins in the shape of automobiles, to slingshots and barbershop signs (Vogel 1991; Steiner 1994)-5

## Crafts-as-Art

It is not surprising to see the fine art—versus-craft division used to appropriate the arts of other cultures; it is surprising to see it used to divide the very crafts that Morris hoped would overcome it. Although the proponents of what has been called the “crafts-as-art movement” claim to have overthrown the barrier between fine art and craft, the actual effect of the movement has been to divide the studio crafts themselves into art and craft approaches. The assimilation of craft media into fine art began in the late 1950s from two directions: from the side of artists, who began to take up craft-identified materials, and from the side of craftspeople who began to take up the styles and nonfunctional aims of fine art. After World War II, many university fine art departments began to offer programs in the studio crafts, which meant that ceramics, weaving, and woodworking students, who might otherwise have gone through an apprenticeship or vocational school, imbibed the same kind of art history and art-world ideas as their fellow students in painting, sculpture, or graphics. Then, in the late 1950s, as neodada and pop artists began to experiment with wood, clay, fibers, resins, and plastics, some ceramists, such as Peter Voulkos, began to borrow from abstract expressionist styles in their glazes and to put multiple spouts and strange bulges on vessel forms or cut holes in them so as to make them useless as “pots” (fig. 79). Voulkos and his followers were soon called “ceramic sculptors” rather than “potters” or “craftsmen” (Slivka 1978). Similar transformations were occurring in other craft media. What had once been “weaving” became “fiber art” through the abstract, three-dimensional work of Lenore Tawney, Sheila Hicks, and Claire Zeisler. Handcrafted furniture was turned into “art furniture” by people as varied in outlook as Sam Maloof, Wendell

*Figure 79. Peter Voulkos, Rocking Pot (1956). Wheel-thrown and slab-constructed stoneware. Courtesy National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C./Art Resource, New York.*

Castle, and Richard Artschwager, whose approaches form a continuum from the always functional to the seldom usable. In glass, the great turn is dated from 1962 when Harry Littleton introduced a studio-size kiln and “glass art” emerged, later achieving a kind of apotheosis of pure form in the work of Dale Chihuly.

With an extra boost from feminists, quilt making also became part of the

## Crafts-as-Art

in a 1971 exhibition, and other major museums soon followed (fig. 80). In the rush to collect older quilts as art, Amish quilts were especially favored by some curators and collectors because their simple geometric patterns reminded them of abstract paintings. But what began as an experimental craft revival was soon invaded by professional artists and led to exhibitions such as The Art Quilt or The Artist and the Quilt (McMorris and Kile 1986). Many women artists influenced by feminism were attracted to quilt making as a way of connecting

*Figure 80. American quilt (1842), Mount Holly, New Jersey: bedcover made for Ella Marie Deacon; cotton, plain weaves; pieced and appliqued with cotton, plain weaves, some printed in a variety of techniques, some glazed; quilted; inscriptions in ink; edged with woven tape; backed with cotton, plain weave; printed; 264.7 X 272.6 centimeters. Gift of Betsey Leeds Tait Puth, 1978.923. Photograph by Nancy Finn, © 2000, Art Institute of Chicago. All Rights Reserved. In the past, quilts were used as bedcovers until worn out, and then they found their way to the barn or machine shed; many of the finer quilts, such as this one, which were preserved and handed down in memory of their makers, began to enter fine art collections in large numbers in the 1970s as prices soared.*

with creative women of the past, although occasionally professional artists merely designed original patterns and paid others to make them into quilts. Yet there were also artists who already knew or learned the necessary sewing techniques and began to focus their careers on creating quilted wall hangings in contemporary art styles, variable sizes, and unusual materials. Although these wall hangings were a species of fiber art, calling them “quilts” was a way of connecting them to the warm associations of an older rural way of life with its communal-support activities, especially the quilting bee. Intended only as works of art rather than as bed or furniture covers, art quilts sometimes ran into a double resistance. The prejudice against needlework was still strong enough that some museum curators resisted quilted wall hangings, even as some traditional quilters and quilting groups rejected them for not following inherited patterns and using hand stitchery (Huitt 1998).

Despite numerous holdouts in both the fine art and craft worlds, the new crafts-as-art approach soon came to dominate the leading craft organizations and journals, as well as craft departments in university art schools. By the 1970s, as the critic John Perreault has remarked, the dividing line between art and craft had become “a dotted line” (Manhart and Manhart 1987,190). When I attended a national symposium titled “Criticism in the Craft Arts” in 1992, what struck me most was the audience response. Declarations that “craft is art” were greeted with cheers and applause, but suggestions that the term “craft” had a dignity and honor of its own, or Perrault’s provocative comment, “I made the mistake once of saying craft was art; no, it is better than art,” were met with silence and a shuffling of feet. Even the Smithsonian’s Renwick Gallery of American Crafts in Washington, D.C., has fervently embraced the crafts-as-art ideal. A wall panel at a 1997 exhibition declared that “aesthetics [and] not function or design” is the “essential criteria” for its collection, and when the Renwick’s permanent collection was reinstalled in 1999, new panels relentlessly drummed into viewers the message that works in so-called craft media were really “art” and that function was incidental.

And yet the larger craft world has been far from unanimous about crafts-as-art; hardly a month went by in the 1980s and 1990s without reference to the issue in one of the craft journals (Andrews 1999)- The pro-art party has tended to dismiss traditional craftspeople as mere technicians—when Richard Meyer, for instance, once introduced himself as a “potter,” a well-known craft artist sneered, “You make bricks or toilets?” (Meyer 1987, 21). The pro-craft party, on its side, charges the art crowd with selling out workmanship and service for the sake of a trendy and superficial art world (Barnard 1992). Although nearly all the pro-art people are consummate technicians, they downplay the importance of skill, generally reject traditional forms, and treat function as dispensable. Pots with holes in them, cups you can’t drink out of, chairs you can’t sit on, books you can’t open have become the popular hallmark of crafts-as-art. The philosopher Arthur Danto has argued more subtly that what transforms a craft-work into art is not the rejection of function per se but a self-consciousness that lifts it from the plane of the merely well made and useful to the plane of significance. The cabinetmaker Garry Knox Bennett understood this, Danto says, when he drove a sixteen-penny nail into the front of his beautiful rosewood cabinet, bent it over and added a halo of hammer marks. Bennett “hammered home ... the truth that art... is a matter of meaning ... and furniture can be an art when it is about its own processes” (i994> 78). From the pro-craft perspective, however, the meanings and pleasures derived from a piece of furniture or a guilt are not merely self-referential but deeply tied to human associations (Ruff 1983). As quilt maker Sandi Fox said of her collection, “I like to know that the quilt was used to keep bodies warm, that it was passed from one generation to another” (Diamonstein 1983, 70).

Ironically, the cutting-edge artists and critics of the 1980s and 1990s art world were largely indifferent to crafts-as-art works, which they often found still too well made and beautiful. So low had the value of craft skill sunk in some quarters by the early 1990s that when Martin Puryear, the much admired wood sculptor, was complimented by an interviewer on his superb craftsmanship, he quickly changed the subject as if sensing that his status as an artist was in danger (Danto 1994). I find it equally symptomatic that “Americas Museum of Craft,” as the Renwick calls itself, keeps denying that the works it shows are craft. But even if all crafts-as-art works were to be enthusiastically accepted as art and all the museums of craft and applied arts in the world changed their names to something like “Museum of Fine Arts in Formerly Craft-Identified Media,” the fine art-versus-craft dualism would not be overcome. As we have seen, the polarities of art/craft, mind/body, male/female, white/black have been historically interrelated in their subordination of the second term to first. One does not transcend such polarities by assimilating a few “worthy” representatives of the subordinate term, and leaving the “superior” side unchanged—in this case by merely absorbing some craft works “into fine art on fine art’s terms” (Guthrie 1988, 29).

## Architecture as Art

The clash between aesthetics and function that has divided the studio crafts has also continued to trouble architecture. The ideal place for showing off crafts-as-art furniture, ceramics, or textiles in the 1960s and 1970s was within the white walls of the architect-designed modernist house or apartment, itself meant to be a “work of art.” By then the ideal image of the architect had become that of the autonomous artist as “exalted purveyor of form” who imposed “his” indi-vidual vision on a passive consumer (Ghirardo 1998,10). Frank Lloyd Wright, like H. H. Richardson before him, had already set the tone in the 1920s and 1930s, with his capes and quips, reinforcing his “artistic persona with a self-conscious rhetoric of integrity, embattlement, and singularity” (Upton 1998, 265). Of course, few architects or art critics of the postwar period would have denied that a house or office building should be functional as well as visually compelling. On the contrary, the modern movement had embraced Sullivans phrase “form follows function,” although, as we have seen, interpreting it to mean the union of new materials and technologies with unornamented, geometric forms. Not all architects went to the extreme of the Bauhaus’s Hannes Meyer in opposing “function” to “art,” but the spare, rectilinear profiles that dominated skylines in the 1960s came to be associated with “functionalism” even if many of the buildings themselves were not very functional in a human sense. Whatever resistance modernism met early on after World War II, its rectangular steel and glass envelopes, minimalist facades, and acres of open floors were quite popular with corporate executives and real-estate developers who appreciated the modernist styles relatively low cost, quick construction, monumental scale, and cachet as abstract art.

Signs of discontent with modernism already began to surface in the 1960s as books such as Jane Jacobs’s The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1961) revealed the bankruptcy of an urban renewal policy that bulldozed whole neighborhoods and replaced them with antiseptic high-rises, and Robert Venturi’s Complexity and Contradiction in Modern Architecture (1966) criticized the boring reductivism of the modernist style. By the 1970s, the postmodern movement was underway with the return of exterior decoration, columns, peaked roofs, cupolas, bas-reliefs, and color. Like many stylistic movements, postmodernism produced some distinguished buildings, and it should be credited with restoring the idea that buildings can also be fun—for example, Michael Graves’s hotel for Walt Disney World, with the giant swans and scallop shells on top. But a lot of postmodernism was primarily a stylistic shift, a matter of surface aesthetics and in-jokes for the art historical crowd, rather than a deep reformation of either architecture or the image of the architect as sovereign artist. By now postmodernism has given way to an exuberant pluralism in architecture as in the other arts, so that buildings can look like anything, from geometric cubes to exploding sculptural fantasies.

The swing from the modernist ideology of function back to the pole of fine art in postmodernism reveals how stultifying the art-versus-craft/aesthetic-versus-function split can become. Some critics of modernism have overreacted

*Figure 81. Frank Lloyd*

Wright, Solomon R.

Guggenheim Museum, New York (1959).

Exterior seen from Fifth Avenue, New York.

Courtesy Art Resource, New York. Wright’s spiral ramp design was meant to enhance the viewer’s experience of consecutive exposure;

the visitor was supposed to take the elevator to the top and walk down the ramp. It works well for some types of works or series but does not allow one to stand back from larger works. and made “functionalism” a dirty word. But we need to distinguish two kinds of functionalism: the technological and the humanistic. Some modernist buildings seemed to follow a philosophy of form follows technology rather than shaping humane environments for work, leisure, or living. The technological functionalism and rectilinear sameness of many modernist buildings, especially as copied by a host of lesser talents, drew the postmodern reaction that was its welcome, if all too formalist, footnote. Restoring a central role to human functioning in architecture would not mean the triumph of some crudely conceived utility over art, but the integration of functional spaces with a sense of place, a satisfying experience of volume, light, and form, and appropriate attention to symbolic meanings.

Certainly, one of the functions of architecture is to afford pleasure for the eye and the mind, but too often this has been at the expense of the body, as we move through buildings and use their spaces for the activities of life. As in the case of crafts-as-art works, the danger of focusing on architecture as “art” is that primacy is given to visual appearance—especially as it strikes the visiting critic or art tourist—to the exclusion of the experience of those who live and work in buildings day after day. As Witold Rybczynski has remarked, in the past it would have been unimaginable that “a building with absolutely no social, civic, or cultural significance could be considered an important piece of architecture.

It is only in the modern period that a building’s aesthetic achievement has been divorced from its actual function” (Rybczynski 1994, 3). And Dell Upton has suggested that the ideal of the artist-architect imposing a personal vision on clients has turned “Art-architecture” into the “quintessential gesture of consumer culture, a commodity made for a passive consumer” (Upton 1998, 283).

Because the art museum has been so important to the construction of the modern system of fine art, we should briefly consider the special challenge of relating art and function in the design of museums. In the second half of the twentieth century, the art museum has been a special temptation for architect-artists to make a “work of art” that upstages its contents, from Wrights Guggenheim in New York (1956) to Frank Gehry’s Guggenheim in Bilbao (1998)

(figs. 81 and 82). Yet art museums, like churches and civic buildings, are also symbolic monuments—in this case, to art itself—and so we are somewhat more forgiving of slights to function. Naturally, one would like to have the best of both worlds: a museum that was itself an exciting building but also served

*Figure 82. Frank Gehry, Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao, Spain (1998). Photography by David Heald. © Fundacion del Museo Guggenheim Bilbao (FMGB) Guggenheim Bilbao Museoa. All Rights Reserved. Partial or total reproduction prohibited. Computer-aided design makes possible both the drawing and the structural calculations for the striking sculptural curves of Gehry’s signature style. The equally curvilinear interior of the Bilbao museum is intended for a few large permanent works with the majority of the space going to temporary exhibits.*

the art works that it contained. But that content has itself radically changed over the past forty years. At a time when many contemporary artists no longer focus on producing self-contained objects for contemplation, some recent museums have been designed less as neutral containers for permanent works than as sites for an interactive experience among the architecture, the temporary exhibits and installations, and a public that seeks high-level cultural diversion (New-house 1998).

## The Photography-as-Art Boom

As we saw in the previous chapter, art photography was accepted into the major art museums by 1940, and curators such as Beaumont Newhall used a combination of expressionist and formalist arguments to justify assimilating large bodies of functional photography. These arguments and practices took a revealing turn in the postwar period. In 1955 what was perhaps the single most successful photographic exhibition in history—The Family of Man—opened at the Museum of Modern Art. Three thousand people a day stood in line in New York, and when the exhibition had finished traveling to thirty-seven countries, some nine million people had seen it. The Family of Man was a romantic celebration of the oneness of humanity, its 503 images grouped around the themes of love, birth, childhood, work, death, and so forth. The show s curator, Edward Steichen, was praised by the public but vilified by many art critics and art photographers, one of whom said the exhibition was “not art at all” and ought to be moved to the Museum of Natural History (Jay 1989, 6). Although some people legitimately complained of the show’s shallow sentimentalism, what angered art critics most was that Steichen had not framed and hung each photograph with the artist’s name beside it but had blown them up to various sizes and mounted them on panels in a series of eye catching montages (fig. 83). The photographs were treated less as discreet art objects than as parts of a didactic and inspirational experience. The depth of the hostility toward the Family of Man—which can still be felt in snide references to it forty-five years later—reflects the angry intervention of the keepers of the discourse of fine art whenever its norms of the sovereign artist and sacred work are violated.

After the art world’s stinging rebuke of The Family of Man, the next curator of photography at the Museum of Modern Art, John Szarkowski, returned to the practice of exhibiting single prints as autonomous works of art. But Szarkowski also made a play for the growing photography audience of the 1960s and 1970s by expanding the appropriation of utilitarian photography to include i

*Figure 83. Installation view of the Family of Man exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, January 24-May 8,1955. Photograph © 2000 Museum of Modern Art, New York.*

even the most crassly commercial or opportunistic pictures. In the exhibition From the Picture Press he presented news photos of crime scenes and human-interest stories, shorn of their original captions, calling them a series of “short poems” (1973, 5). But more significant in enlarging the scope of art photography was the use of photography by people who considered themselves artists who happened to employ photography (Andy Warhol, Cindy Sherman, Sherrie Levine, Andreas Serrano), rather than photographers who made art photographs. Now photography entered the museum in two ways: on the one hand as photography, a medium with its own purely “photographic uniqueness and canon of masterpieces (whether made as art or appropriated later), and on the other hand as part of postmodern multimedia experiments by artists who did not hesitate to violate the rules of “straight” photography by using posed scenes, darkroom manipulation, collage, and, more recently, digital imaging and computer enhancement.

In the 1970s and 1980s the enthusiasm for photography as art reached such heights that not only were collectors, dealers, and old line art museums scurrying to get in on the photography boom, but even libraries began to reclassify nineteenth-century books that contained photographic prints, mibving them from the science, history, or travel shelves to the art section. In this assimilative activity, the subject matter and original purpose of older photographs, even when known, were neutralized in order to reprocess them as Art (Crimp 1993). Of course, art museums and art historians have not appropriated every photograph for fine art any more than they take in all medieval or all Yoruba artifacts but, instead, only those that fit certain aesthetic agendas. The fine art-versus-craft division has continued to be applied within photography to determine which of thousands of nearly indistinguishable historical images “shall pass into the temple of Art” (Solomon-Godeau 1991, 22)- As in the case of primitive” art or folk quilts, reclassification and assimilation are usually regarded as merely a benign promotion to higher status. But in transforming many of these photographs into art we also neutralize their power as witness. In the context of the art museum and the art history text, a photograph of concentration camp survivors at Bergen-Belsen becomes testimony not of the Holocaust but of Art and of the artist, Margaret Bourke-White.

## The “Death of Literature”?

The literary version of the art-versus-craft polarity is the division between an autonomous “literature” appreciated for itself and “mere writing” aimed at ordinary pleasure or utility. In the broader culture this division is often used by book reviewers to contrast literature to mere fiction, an opposition given palpable form by one bookstore chain that sets up an entire wall designated “fiction” and a few shelves nearby called “literature,” where one finds Austen and Tolstoy. Of course, the most powerful institutional expression of the Literature-versus-literature division has been the traditional canon taught in schools and universities. From around 1940 to 1970, the separation of literature from the rest of writing was often justified by the principles of the “New Criticism.” In this formalist view, a novel, play, or poem was a self-contained object to be carefully examined for its internal unity. Of course, that didn’t prevent my college English teachers in the 1950s from claiming that literature offered the deepest of spiritual nourishments, and I remember the warmth and zeal with which many played out their role as secular clerics.

This lovely world was rudely broken in upon during the 1960s not only by such conflicts as the Civil Rights and antiwar movements but also by new theories emanating from France, such as structuralism and deconstruction. Although the new theories were themselves rather formalist and clashed with each other, they shared an indifference to the sacrosanct notions of “literature” and the “great writer.” The titles of two of the most accessible of the new theoretical writings drove home the point, Roland Barthes’s “From Work to Text” and “The Death of the Author.” Using the same semiotic techniques on great works of literature that they used on marriage customs, clothing styles, or news stories, the structuralists treated literary works as “texts,” as tissues of social and linguistic codes. The “death of the author” was a strict corollary of the shift from work to text since authorial genius was now less important than the general circulation of signs. Deconstructionists only made things worse for the idea of Literature when they argued that language never quite reaches its object but constantly displaces reference in an infinite chain of signifiers, leaving even the structuralists’ “text” a field of hopelessly deferred meanings. As if structuralism and deconstruction were not enough, fresh theoretical approaches such as reader response theory and New Historicism plunged canonical works and authors ever deeper into the web of social determination as feminist, marx-ist, Afrocentric, gay/lesbian, and postcolonial theorists condemned the traditional literary canon as narrowly male, middle-class, heterosexual, white, and Eurocentric.

Traditionalists were deeply wounded by these successive assaults on the great works and great artists of Literature, and by the time the new theoretical approaches began to dominate the graduate schools and literary journals in the 1980s, a movement of reaction had set in. A lot of the theory bashing of the 1990s alternated between ill-humored carping and nostalgia for the good old days when people were content to “love literature.” Many “theorists,” on their part, continued to parade a pompous jargon and the smug tone of those who believe they alone hold the moral high ground. Are we threatened with The Death of Literature, as the title of one of the better surveys of the predicament of literature puts it? (Kernan 1990). If what is threatened is the idea of an eternal Literature of self-contained works forming an “ideal order” for the spiritual solace of a cultured elite, perhaps it deserves to die. That does not mean we should swing to the opposite pole and treat all texts as equal. Yet the Literature-versus-literature polarity, like the underlying fine art-versus-craft dichotomy, is so deeply embedded in our thinking and practice it will not be easy to reunite the sundered halves. Although hard to hear above the noise of the theory/antitheory debate, quieter voices have for some time been trying to redefine the specifically “literary” and create a multicultural canon without falling back into the essentialist and elitist trap of the modern idea of Literature (Berube 1998; Scholes 1998; Widdowson 1999).

## Mass Art

A more long-standing worry for the survival of “serious” literature, music, and drama has been competition from popular fiction, recordings, radio, television, and film. Although the guardians of high culture have tended to dismiss ordinary pleasures and diversions as “mere entertainment, the practitioners of the lesser arts have unabashedly claimed the titles of art and artist. In a 1991 in_ terview, Barry Manilow showed all the angst appropriate to the modern ideals of art and the artist: “It had gotten to the point where it wasn’t art, and it wasn’t music—it was business_I had made it so big and so fast I lost my balance, and a lot of artists to whom that happens never find their way back home. . . . The art takes a beating” (Holden 1991). Although the nineteenth-century separation of works, audiences, and institutions remained largely in place during the first half of the twentieth century, the expansion and improvement of film, radio, sound recording, and printed photography gradually transformed the relation of the fine and popular arts. Walter Benjamin’s marx-ist embrace of the new mass arts was as complex and nuanced as the American critic Gilbert Seldes’s was simple: for Seldes it was enough that popular arts like the cartoon strip or film had already produced masters such as George Herri-man and Charlie Chaplin (Seldes [1924] 1957). Yet the majority of philosophers and critics during the first half of the century, from Collingwood and Dwight MacDonald to Theodor Adorno and Clement Greenberg, vehemently reiterated their belief in a deep opposition between serious art and popular art. And even though the new media permitted the mass distribution of accessible versions of high-art works, critics like Greenberg sneered at such “middle-brow” culture, challenging intellectuals with an apocalyptic choice: avant-garde or kitsch (Greenberg 1961; Kulka 1996).

Many critics sympathetic to new media followed the pattern used earlier for the novel and photography, applying the fine art-versus-craft distinction within film and jazz. Just as there was the “art novel” or “art photography,” in which complexity, experimental forms, or daring subject matter set it off from more accessible novels and pictures, so an “art film” tradition has developed. In the realm of music, jazz was also split. Thanks to the early efforts of Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, and Thelonius Monk, one part of jazz was transformed from danceable pieces for noisy clubs into a recognized art form for pure lis-tening, whereas the rest evolved into swing and other popular genres. By now, art jazz is not only taught in conservatories alongside classical music but has also achieved “museum” status, with the Lincoln Center touring band playing the jazz classics of Ellington and others for polite middle-class audiences around the country. Yet the fine art model, especially the image of the artist as heroic loner, ill suits arts such as jazz and film, whose finest productions are so often collaborative. In studies of film as fine art, for example, the ideal of the lone artist-genius led to a focus on the director as auteur, which dominated film criticism for many years, a practice still reflected in our habit of referring to films as “by” their director. But if a film like Citizen Kane is rightly considered one of the greatest films of the century, it is as much thanks to Herman Mankiewiczs script and Greg Toland’s cinematography as to Orson Welles’s directing (fig. 84).

*Figure 84. Citizen Kane (1941), Orson Welles, director; Herman Mankiewicz, screenplay, Greg Toland, cinematography. Film still. Courtesy Museum of Modern Art/ Film Stills Archive, New York. Turner Entertainment Company.*

Yet the boundary between art music or the art film and popular works has become more permeable than ever, less a boundary than a continuum. In music, the traffic between classical and popular, folk, or ethnic music—already engaged in by Bartok, Ives, and Stravinsky at the beginning of the century—has remained brisk, and popular music on its side has continued to borrow from the classics. In defending his fusion of classical and jazz idioms, the composer Gunther Schuller remarked, “It is a way of making music which holds that all musics are created equal” (Schwartz and Childs 1998, 413) * In film, the finest filmmakers of the twentieth century—Chaplin, Eisenstein, and Renoir, early on, and, later, Hitchcock, Truffaut, and Kurosawa—made works that were artistically innovative and challenging yet accessible and popular. The same is true of the novel. Although some academic critics treat only the most difficult and esoteric of experimental novels as “art,” the writings of Marguerite Duras, John Updike, Toni Morrison, or Milan Kundera have achieved interesting artistic effects while remaining accessible to a broad audience. Meanwhile, Norman Mailer, Maxine Hong Kingston, Joan Didion, and others have bridged the gap between fiction and fact, the purely literary and the social-political in what is now taught in literature departments as the “new journalism” or “creative nonfiction.”

One reason the status of popular art is so hard to pin down is that it has historically been the intersection of various political and cultural agendas, sometimes with surprising results. Thus, both conservative and radical critics in the past have often agreed that popular art is exploitive, commercial kitsch. Theodor Adorno s left-wing attacks on jazz and popular music were as savage as Allan Bloom’s conservative blasts at rock, if a good deal more sophisticated. Many of those who have taken a negative view of popular art, such as Adorno or Dwight MacDonald, have insisted that we ought to call it “mass culture” or “mass art” since it is not the culture of the people but something concocted by a manipulative “culture industry.” Such critics have typically contrasted fine art to mass art as complex to simple, original to formulaic, critical to conformist, challenging to escapist. Those more sympathetic to popular art reply that the best works of popular art are often complex, original, and challenging within the limits of accessibility and that the “masses” are not an undifferentiated lump of passive consumers but are capable of skepticism and independent interpretation. Such arguments were reinforced in the 1960s and 1970s by pop art and crossover experiments in music and literature that encouraged critics in both the art and academic worlds to offer serious aesthetic analyses of popular culture. Progressive literature professors began to teach courses on detective fiction, Hollywood films, and television sitcoms alongside Eliot, Woolf, and Faulkner, and some art galleries began to exhibit framed Disney panels along with Roy Lichtenstein’s high-art takeoffs on them.

Today, instead of jeremiads, many critics and philosophers are trying to reconcile fine and popular art by seeking a purely classificatory definition of art that will allow a noninvidious distinction between fine and popular (Dickie 1997). Ted Cohen suggests that the fine arts create small communities of appre-ciators who are intensely linked by a knowledge of tradition, whereas the popular arts link us less intensely to larger communities of interest (1999)- Arthur Danto is willing to take in a great deal of what has traditionally been classified as commercial or mass art so long as it uses its medium to make a statement about its medium (Danto 1997). Noel Carroll has developed an extensive case for distinguishing avant-garde or high art from mass art in a way that allows for an appreciation of the positive features of both (1998).

Despite the attempt of some philosophers to get us to treat art as a neutral category, for most people who care about whether something is art or not, it is the evaluative sense that counts—the “aura” of lofty connotations that still surround “art” and “artist” (Shusterman 2000). Walter Benjamin’s claim about the decline of the aura in an age of mechanical reproduction is often quoted as a truism, yet it is not clear that the mass media have eliminated either the aura of the original work or the aura surrounding the ideal of art itself. For it was not only nineteenth-century office clerks who wanted to devote their lives to divine Art” but a host of twentieth-century artists of every type as well, from Proust to Madonna. That is why it is so important to some critics that we “elevate” the music, dances, and masks of traditional African or Native American societies to the status of art, or why some artists working in clay or wood are ready to put holes in pots or drive sixteen-penny nails into fine finishes. The aura clings—even if it has dimmed.

## Art and Life

If the fine art-versus-craft division hangs on in faded glory despite a century and a half of trying to overcome it, attempts to transcend the related but more general separation of art and life might appear to have fared better (Kaprow 1993)- Some dadas, as we have seen, already made reuniting art and life part of their attack on Art in 1917, and the Russian constructivists made even more sweeping pronouncements and backed them up by working for industry and the state. Efforts to get art and life back together over the next fifty years careened wildly from the “Bureau of Surrealist Research” in Paris in the 1920s to social realist films, novels, and paintings of the 1930s, to the New York “happenings” of the 1950s, to the Situationist International’s political gestures and the Fluxus movement’s art pranks of the 1960s. Yet few twentieth-century gestures have achieved the notoriety of Marcel Duchamp’s Fountain, the men’s urinal to which he affixed the signature “R. Mutt” before attempting to exhibit it at the Society of Independent Artists show in New York in 1917 (fig. 85). Although it physically belongs to the beginning of the twentieth century, its influence—and Duchamp’s interpretation of its implications—have been most important since the 1950s. By turning things such as snow shovels, bottle racks,

*Figure 85. Marcel Duchamp, Fountain (1917). Photography by Alfred Stieglitz; reproduced in The Blind Man, no. 2 (May 1917). Courtesy Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Louise and Walter Arensberg Archives. © 2001 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris/Estate of Marcel Duchamp.*

pocket combs, and urinals into fine art by fiat, it is said, Duchamp knocked fine art off its pedestal and erased the distinction between art and life. Yet Duchamp himself was too shrewd simply to adopt an outright negative position, as becomes apparent when one looks more closely at the context of Fountain and Duchamps later comments on his readymades.

Duchamp was a member of the board of the Society of Independent Artists, which had declared that “any artist” might enter its 1917 exhibition since there would be “no jury, no prizes” (de Duve 1991, 191). Duchamp decided to test whether his artist-colleagues meant what they said. Signing the urinal “R. Mutt” assured anonymity, and the board took the bait, refusing to exhibit Fountain on the grounds that it was obscene, was not art, and would bring ridicule on the society. Duchamp not only resigned in protest (still not revealing it was he who presented Fountain) but also joined with two friends to produce a little magazine called The Blind Man, which ridiculed the act of rejecting Fountain, claiming that it was art since Mr. Mutt “chose it. He took an ordinary article of life, placed it so that its useful significance disappeared under the new title and point of view—created a new thought for that object” (de Duve 1991,198).

Was Fountain a work of art or anti-art? As a strategy vis-a-vis the Society of Independent Artists, Fountain staked a claim to be art just as much as the paintings they exhibited, although Duchamp always insisted it was not for any “aesthetic” qualities (Sanouillet and Peterson 1973,141). But at the same time Fountain was anti-art in the sense that it radically challenged what the art world took to be the limits of art. In the latter case, Fountain would seem once again to be art, since its aim was not so much to overthrow the system of art as to open it up. Duchamp’s dialectic of art and anti-art infected his response to most of the central components of the modern system of art. He attacked the idea of art as a separate realm and entity: “We created it for our sole and unique use; it’s a little like masturbation. I don’t believe in the essential aspect of art (Cabanne 1971, too). Yet the same Duchamp could also say: “Only in art is [man] capable of going beyond the animal state, because art is an outlet toward regions which are not ruled by time and space” (Sanouillet and Peterson 1973,137).

Duchamp’s relation to the art-versus-craft dichotomy was equally ambiguous. At first glance his readymades might seem to break down the barrier between art and craft, but they actually reinforce it since the readymade is not a piece of handicraft but an industrial product removed from its function and transformed into art by the artist’s mind. Duchamp also rejected the “attitude of reverence” for the artist: “Art, etymologically speaking, means ‘to make.’ Everybody is making, not only artists, and maybe in coming centuries there will be the making without the noticing” (Duchamp 1968, 47, 62). Yet Duchamp himself was far from “making and not noticing,” since he helped Walter Arens-berg gather Duchamp’s works and negotiate the most favorable deal for their long-term exhibition (the Philadelphia Art Museum won out by guaranteeing twenty-five years to the Art Institute of Chicago’s ten and the New York Metropolitan Museum’s five) (Cabanne 1971,87; Kuenzli and Naumann 1990, 4).

Duchamp’s ambivalence about the major facets of the modern system of art were not the result of some puckish desire to befuddle but reflected a deep awareness of the power of art as a social institution. In a note to himself jotted down back in 1913, he asked, “Can one make a work that is not a work of art?” (Sanouillet and Peterson 1973,137). The long series of readymades that began shortly after could be seen as a strategy for exploring that question. Yet these early anti-art gestures of Duchamp, like those of dada/surrealism and Russian constructivism, have long since been recaptured by the art world in ways that blunt their critique of the fine art system. “The fact that they are regarded with the same reverence as objects of art,” Duchamp remarked in the 1960s, “probably means that I have failed to solve the problem of trying to do away entirely with art” (Duchamp 1968, 62; Cabanne 1971, 71).

George Leonard has argued that whereas Duchamp failed to do away with art, the composer, John Cage succeeded, bringing Western society to Wordsworth’s hoped-for “blissful hour” when the art object can be dispensed with, and we may emerge “into the light of things” (Leonard 1994). During a period when the atonal and serial experiments of the musical avant-garde were becoming ever more self-reflexive and inaccessible to the ordinary musical public, Cage and others deeply challenged the fine art ideal of the self-contained musical work. Certainly, his 4' 33" will stand alongside Duchamp’s Fountain as one of the most important art/anti-art moments of the twentieth century. In 4'33" as first performed in 1952, the pianist David Tudor came on the stage, sat down at the piano and held his hands above the keys for four minutes, thirty-three seconds, making gestures to indicate three movements. The music consisted not only of the four minutes and thirty-three seconds of silence but of the sounds of coughing, rustling programs, and other noises that penetrated the concert area. Cage’s piece showed more than any previous composition that the ordinary sounds around us can be just as much a part of music as the sounds of traditional instruments playing formal compositions. Although Cage had already been experimenting in the 1930s and 1940s with indeterminacy and unusual sounds by combining multiple recordings or writing works for the “prepared piano” (a piano with bolts and other items lying on the strings), in 4' 33" indeterminacy is so great that there is no way to predict what sounds will emerge. Both art and artist seem reduced to the task of pointing us toward the “music” of the world around us (Kostelanetz 1996).

In subsequent works—Cage sometimes took to calling them “art pieces” in an effort to defeat the work concept—he increased indeterminacy by multiplying the sources of sounds and by further randomizing procedures, including having the performance end when the last auditor got up to leave. In some ways Cage did go beyond Duchamp, who had minimized the role of the artist as one of selection, whereas Cage made the artist’s role merely one of setting up the conditions of indeterminacy. Yet, by emphasizing the composer’s intellectual capacity rather than facility for rhythm, melody, or harmony, Cage also raised the composer as thinker even higher above composers devoted to the craft of producing musical works. Like Duchamp before him and the conceptualists later, getting art and life together did not mean placing a higher value on craft skills or function but, instead, teasing the mind into seeing art and the surrounding world in a new way. Moreover, just as Fountain has both been hailed as a liberation from the fetishism of the art work and been appropriated as an art work itself, so has 4' 33"• Cage’s 4' 33" along with his other compositions, performance pieces, and prose poems have been easily assimilated by the art world and are performed in concert halls or art galleries and discussed primarily in music, art, and literature classrooms and journals.

The possibilities for musical experimentation since Cage’s 4' 33" were enormously expanded with the development of the synthesizer, which gave both the high serialism of the academic composers and the high jinks of the experimentalists an almost unlimited range of sounds (Nyman 1974)- Experimental composers associated with the loosely defined Fluxus movement took up a direction Cage had not developed, engaging in a kind of theater or performance art parodying traditional concert procedures. In the Fluxorchestra concerts of 1964 65 programs were sailed from the balcony as folded airplanes, the musicians fell off their chairs at a signal, scores made of flash paper ignited, and Ben Vau-tier’s Secret Room ended by leading the audience to the “secret room, which was actually the back exit into the street (Kahn 1993). A more traditional way of connecting with audiences came from experiments using electronic resources to create musical environments of pulsating sounds and rhythms, many o them drawn from non-Western musical traditions. Philip Glass has integrated India’s rhythmically organized music with Western melody, consonance, and harmonic progression to create operas and instrumental pieces that have appealed to a varied audience, including rock enthusiasts. Although some music critics have charged Glass and other “minimalist” composers with exploiting tonality and pulsing rhythms in an unseemly quest for audience approval, Glass sees himself as reconnecting “serious” music with the world outside the academic enclaves into which so many modernist composers had retreated. For years, Glass supported himself by odd jobs and by touring with his own ensemble, and it was playing for live audiences that led him back to the old idea of the composer/performer: “We became real people again to audiences. We learned to talk to people again. As a group we lost our exclusivity, the kind that had been built up through years of academic life-We saw the role of the artist in a much more traditional way—the artist being part of the culture that he lives in” (Duckworth 1995, 337). If Glass and other process composers are known beyond the small middle-class concert audience, however, it is due to the most important factor of all in the development of music since the 1950s: the exponential transformation and spread of recording and playback devices, which have gone from the transistor radio through the cassette to the portable CD player and now the computer. Music in the largest sense is already electronically integrated into everyday life, and younger people respond to musical sounds they like without asking their artistic pedigree.

In the visual arts since the 1960s, a great deal of pop, conceptual, performance, installation, and environmental art has also resisted the polarities of the fine art system and tried to bring art and life closer, sometimes charmingly, as in Jenny Holzer’s marquee banalities, such as her 1985 electronic sign “Protect me From What I Want,” and sometimes more threateningly, as in Hans Haake’s highly charged political installations, such as his 1971 expose of Manhanttan slum lord holdings. Environmental artists such as Michael Heizer and Robert Smithson shunned galleries in the 1970s to make huge earth pieces in the Western deserts. Warhol and other pop artists continued to make fun of the sacrosanct aura of the artist and the work of art, and conceptual artists often produced no “work” at all. Vito Acconci’s pieces often consisted of prescriptions for repetitive actions, such as stepping up and down off a chair, whereas Bruce Nauman spewed water out of his mouth and called it Fountain, thereby going Duchamp one better. Performances like Carolee Schneemann’s Interior Scroll or many of Joseph Beuys’s political and environmental “actions” often took place outside of or in conflict with the usual art venues. Beuys even founded a political party and an independent university in Germany as part of his art activities, claiming that anything one does freely and creatively is art, whether teaching or peeling a potato. Feminist artists such as Barbara Kruger used conventional advertising techniques to drive home her message, whereas Judy Chicago’s Dinner Party was collaborative, unashamedly didactic, and celebrated the low-ranked crafts of ceramics and embroidery. Other feminist artists have used perfor-Figure 86. Christine Nelson, Man Ray’s Irony (1997); household iron, latex. Courtesy the artist. This feminist parody of Man Ray’s Gift (fig. 73) puts baby bottle nipples in the place of sharp tacks and is part of Nelsons “redress” series in which small household appliances are dressed up in spandex, tassels, fake furs, and so forth, making them at once playfully erotic and critical of consumerism and mass-marketing ploys.

mance, installation, transformations of “readymade” consumer goods, and parodies of canonical “male” works to reconnect their work with everyday concerns (fig. 86). Among the artists most successful at integrating art and society is Christo, whose wrapped building projects often require months or even years of negotiations with governments, community groups, and individual property owners, their completion drawing on collaborative teams of engineers, technicians, manufacturers, construction workers, and volunteers. The wrapping of the Berlin Reichstag for two weeks in 1995 took place after twenty years of intermittent negotiations, climaxing in an intense debate in the German parliament.

The entire process engaged thousands of people in discussions on the nature of art and its relation to society (Christo 1996).

But there have been experiments in bringing art into daily life even more intimately collaborative than Christo s, such as the neighborhood mural movement in which artists design and paint side by side with local people or various quilt projects such as the nationwide Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt. Activities of this kind belong to a diffuse movement that has come to be called “community-based art.” One of the best examples is the 1993 “Culture in Action” project in Chicago, curated by Mary Jane Jacob, which involved a dozen artists working with a variety of interest groups, organizations, and neighborhoods on eight projects. Some of the projects were a candy bar called “We Got It!” which was designed, made, and marketed by members of the candy workers union; a series of videos created by Latino youth and shown on monitors around their neighborhood; a hydroponic vegetable garden whose growth site and produce was tied into AIDS service agencies; and three parades through ethnic communities celebrating immigrant labor. Scattered around the city among people who would not feel comfortable in places like the Museum of Contemporary Art, these activities reversed cultural power relations so that members of the museum and gallery world, for a change, were the outsiders who wondered why these strange activities were called “art” (Jacob 1995). “Culture in Action,” Michael Brenson has written, had “as much to do with the essence of art as anything in a gallery or museum.” As Brenson sees it, “Modernist painting and sculpture will always offer an aesthetic experience of a profound and indispensable kind, but it is one that can now do very little to respond effectively to the social and political challenges and traumas of American life. Its dialogues and reconciliations are essentially private and metaphorical, and they now have limited potential to speak to those citizens of multicultural America whose artistic traditions approach objects not as worlds in themselves but as instruments of performances and other rituals that take place outside institutions” (Jacob 1995, 29).

“Culture in Action” raised questions about the nature of art that were even more difficult than those posed by many individual conceptual and performance pieces, which the art world has often comfortably ingested. Some of individual projects in “Culture in Action” were almost indistinguishable from the sorts of things done by imaginative grassroots political activists who would not think of calling what they do “art.” To that extent, parts of “Culture in Action” could be seen as the true heir of Russian constructivism. Art is not simply integrated into life but disappears as a distinctive activity. It remains an open question whether we want to go that far in dissolving art into life.

## Public Art

Community-based art projects such as “Culture in Action” draw on a variety of funding sources: mainline foundations, corporate sponsors, individual givers, business donations in kind, and, of course, the National Endowment for the Arts, along with state and local arts councils. The conception, location, and funding of community-based projects makes them “public art” in a special sense (Lacy 1995). But some of their intense dedication to bringing art and life together can also be found in many art works that are “public” in a more traditional way, that is, works directly commissioned by government bodies. Thanks in part to the many “percent for art programs” (which set aside half of one percent of public constructions costs to be used for artwork), enormous numbers of sculptures, paintings, and mixed media pieces have been created for public buildings and plazas over the past thirty years. Many public art works have been self-contained abstract sculptures meant for aesthetic contemplation, and some have graced their locations, such as the big Picasso in Chicago’s downtown or the Serra piece in Pittsburg. But if the age of the bronze general on a horse is long past, the dominance of the self-contained work for aesthetic encounter is also being challenged, not only by colorful mixed-media pieces that directly address the viewer but also by designs for public spaces by such artists as Mary Miss or Scott Burton, who join art and craft by seeking visual engagement and providing places to sit, gather, or play (Senie 1992).

We can get a better sense of the issues at stake in the older and newer kinds of public art by comparing two particularly controversial American works from the 1980s: Richard Serra’s Tilted Arc in New York and Maya Lin’s Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. The intense debate surrounding Serra’s Tilted Arc (1981) rehearsed all the established values of the modern system of art with its exalted ideal of the artist as creative genius and the artwork as sacred object. The controversy began when office workers objected that Serra’s twelve-foot-high steel wall bisecting the plaza in front of their building destroyed the plaza’s potential usefulness (fig. 87). When hearings opened over the work’s removal, Serra claimed that his work was “site specific” and would be destroyed if moved, but it is clear that Serra’s idea of site specific did not include how people might use the plaza other than how they would respond to Tilted Arc as an autonomous artwork (Weyergraf-Serra and Buskirk 1991)- Serra was not being a bad actor in taking this stand; he was simply expressing the regulative norms of the modern system of fine art and carrying out the wishes of a selection committee that also shared them. The art-world critics who rushed to Serra’s defense often dismissed the complaining workers as ignorant philistines, and one

*Figure 87. Richard Serra, Tilted Arc, New York (1981). Photograph courtesy of Robin Holland.*

even compared the hearings to Nazi tribunals. Most of those who defended Tilted Arc clearly believed that an artwork’s formal and expressive achievements should take precedence over the functions and pleasures of everyday life and that the opinions of art-world experts should be the final court of appeal. Tilted Arc was eventually removed in 1989 to cries of outrage in the art-world press.

The other controversial work of public art, Maya Lin’s Vietnam Veterans Memorial (1982), generated heated objections to the unconventional appearance of its long, low wall with the names of those killed in the war, with the result that a figural monument by Frederick Hartt was also erected nearby. But the “wall,” as it is known, has become one of the most visited places in Washington, D.C., a deeply affecting memorial where the names of those who died and the feelings and questions of those who remember take precedence over Art (fig. 88). Here, art and craft, beauty and function, creative imagination and public service join in a new way, offering a democratic version of what once happened under the old system of art. Serras “wall” and the controversy over it played out the exalted claims for art, artist, and the aesthetic of the modern system of art, while Maya Lin’s wall points us beyond art and craft.6

*Figure 88. Maya Lin, Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Washington, D.C. (1982). Photograph courtesy Stephen Griswold.*

One positive outcome of the Serra and Lin cases has been a new way of approaching public art in recent years. Instead of a panel of art-world insiders choosing an artist to drop a self-contained work into the public square, selection committees now attempt to represent the broader community, and artists often talk with the people who will have to live with the work. In St. Louis, where another Serra “wall” has rankled some residents for over a decade, the artist Mary Miss received a commission in 1999 for a nearby public project and began meeting with civic groups, not just to fend off potential complaints but actually to listen. In the same Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan where Serra s Tilted Arc once stood, the artist Martha Schwartz created a new work in 1996. Schwartz decided to “shape the space for the way people actually use it and created continuous curves of brightly colored benches surrounding a half-dozen conical grass mounds topped with mist fountains. Instead of an aggressive wall or a barren void, Federal Plaza workers now have a more inviting space that combines function and aesthetic interest (Beardsley 1998,151).

In Europe, public art has undergone a shift similar to that in the United States. As Vivien Lovell of Britain’s Public Art Commissions Agency has remarked, today’s public art “prioritizes process over product by engaging the public in the genesis and creation of the work” (Gooding 1999). Recent public art projects in Britain have ranged from the abstract simplicity ofthe town of Shrewsbury’s small sculptural memorial to the war poet Wilfred Owen, featuring lines of his poetry chiseled in the stone at the request of the community, to the comprehensive “Out of Darkness” project in Wolverhampton, where twelve artists have made creative use of lighting to bring nighttime excitement and enhance the sense of security by outlining buildings, highlighting architectural features, and illuminating open spaces. And in France, in a concrete courtyard just behind the eighteenth-century Palais Royale in the center of Paris, Daniel Buren has erected a series of cut-off columns of varied height, decorated with his signature stripe pattern. Although not designed through public consultation and highly controversial at first, Buren’s Columns not only echoes the neoclassical architecture of its surroundings but has become a place of relaxation and play, where adults sit or stand on the lowest columns and children run and skate among them (fig. 89). Buren envisaged his piece not only as a “monumental sculpture” that would relate to the surrounding colonnades and reveal the presence of the lower level of the courtyard but also as a pedestrian environment in which the columns were available to be sat or climbed on, turning visitors into “living sculptures” (Nuridsany 1993, 5).

When the German artist Jochen Gerz received a commission to redesign the crumbling war memorial in the French village of Biron (pop. 500), he could have leveled the eighty-year-old stone cube with its typical stubby obelisk on top. Instead he asked over a hundred of the inhabitants of the village to respond to a confidential question having to do with the meaning of sacrifice in life and war and engraved each person’s statement on an enamel plaque. The plaques were then affixed to the old monument. A typical one said: “Life is incredible. Wars haven’t gotten us anything. For me, what we have lived through in this century is abominable. My brother was arrested. He went to prison Monday, he was shot on Tuesday. Certain things have been taken care of since then. But I feel sorry for the young. They have to vandalize, try to grab some cash here or there. To say what is worth the effort is difficult, I don’t know the future. We live in a hard time” (Aboudrar 2000, 273). The artist and his “work” are almost invisible at the Living Monument of Biron; the creativity is not only in Gerz’s conception but also in the life of the community expressed by its citizens. Gerz has remarked, “I like the idea that the author of the work is not just the artist. . . what pleases me is that the people of Biron are making their own monument” (Aboudrar 2000, 273-74). Gerz hopes that one of the villagers will now take

*Figure 89. Daniel Buren, Les deux plateaux, known as The Columns (1986). Photograph courtesy Suzanna Williams.*

over and continue to gather testimonies so that Living Monument will remain just that. Gerz s monument reminds me of Rousseau’s idea of the festival as an alternative to the exclusivity of the fine art theater. As in the festival, where the people are the actors and show themselves to one another, so in the Biron monument the people are themselves the artists and speak to one another. Like Maya Lin’s Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Gerz’s Living Monument of Biron resolutely turns away from the modern ideals of the autonomous artist and the self-referential work to embrace a democratic vision of collaboration, service, and social function.
