---
book: "The Invention of Art: A Cultural History"
author: "Larry Shiner"
part: null
chapter: null
title: "Conclusion"
source_pages: "304-307"
type: source
---

# Conclusion

s recently as fifty years ago there were influential artists and critics rs. ready to deny the name “art” to any work of literature, painting, or music that did not participate in the modernist quest for purity. Since then, two forms of assimilation have converged to explode the category of art: on the one hand, movements within the fine arts have been able to turn almost any conceivable material, sound, or activity into art and get it accepted by art institutions; on the other hand, fine art institutions themselves have used the art-versus-craft polarity to divide and appropriate everything from so-called primitive art to jazz and the new journalism. Yet even as assimilation has been gaining momentum, the tradition of resistance has also flourished, offering challenges to the underlying polarities of the fine art system as varied as those of John Cage, Roland Barthes, Maya Lin, and Mary Jane Jacob.

Although traditional fine art institutions have tried in the past to recuperate or neutralize many of these challenges to Art, some of those same institutions have begun to change under the combined effects of economic necessity, social criticism, and new editors, music directors, and curators. The movement called “the new museology,” for example, has been rewriting the history of museums and reappraising collection and exhibition practices, the place of the museum in society, and even the museum’s effect of “making art” by assimilation. In response, museums have revised exhibition policies, expanded educational and outreach programs, and even gone outside their walls with participatory community projects. The proliferation of gift shops, bookstores, cafes, special events, blockbuster exhibitions, explanatory wall panels, background videos, and headsets has gone so far that some critics now complain of museums pandering to commercialism and popular taste rather than focusing on art. Some symphony, dance, and theater companies have also increased efforts at audience education, expanded crossover programming, and taken performances into everyday contexts that break the traditional “art” illusion of the concert hall or proscenium stage. Festival organizations and community arts councils have been even quicker to embark on experimental programming and new venues in the quest for larger and more diverse audiences and have funded storefront art centers and community-based projects such as “Culture in Action.”1

The disciplines devoted to the teaching, criticism, and history ofithe fine arts have also been changing. Literature departments have expanded the canon and the scope of what counts as “literature,” and literary scholars have begun exploring the implications of the late emergence of literature as a discipline. Art history, dominated in the mid-twentieth century by a formalism that virtually ignored women and minority artists and sometimes wrote off entire areas of art as retrograde (e.g., the Mexican muralists), long ago recovered an interest in social and political context and new methods of analysis. Historians of music have also begun to question the traditional preoccupation with analyzing a limited canon of masterpieces by great (male) composers and have sought to broaden the scope and methods of musicology. Philosophers have been exploring the historicity of the idea of art, and feminists in all disciplines have shown that we can no longer do aesthetics and the history and criticism of the arts while ignoring issues of gender. Finally, the most radical disciplinary revisionists would dissolve literature into cultural studies, art history into a history of images, and the history of Western classical music into an enlarged ethnomusicology. Yet most of these new interdisciplinary proposals seem destined to supplement rather than supplant existing disciplines.2

But to move beyond the modern system of art would mean not only reshaping the institutions and disciplines of the fine art system but also overcoming its ambivalence toward skill, beauty, function, and sensual pleasure. Although facility has never been wholly eliminated from the ideal of fine art, the dream of reuniting fine art and craft at the level of the body has now been further complicated by the digital revolution. The advent of hypertext, cyberart, virtual architectural models, synthesized sound, and automatic transcription has made traditional forms of writing, drawing, or composing “by hand” seem ever more problematic in many arts. Of course, traditional storytelling, music making, dance, and handicraft still go on in the villages of so-called Third World countries—although these activities sometimes become part of exploitative marketing systems serving tourists and folk art consumers. In advanced industrial economies, handcrafts—such as woodworking, sewing, gardening, and even weaving and pottery—that were once necessities or occupations have long been part-time or leisure options for the middle classes. When it comes to music, literature, and drama, there is still the family piano (or electronic keyboard) in some homes; and community choral ensembles, poetry circles, and theater groups still develop skills and provide the opportunities for expression and participation without which we would all be reduced to nothing but consumers of art.

Of equal importance to a revival of respect for craft skills are the linked values of function and sensual pleasure—often depreciated in the past as “mere utility” and “mere entertainment.” As the “mere” indicates, the fine art tradition has seldom rejected function and sensory pleasure outright but has made them incidental to the autonomy of the artwork and the refined sensibility of the aesthetic. It is here that the highest price has been paid for the autonomy of art, an elevation and spiritualization that often isolated the fine arts in a cultural enclave and generated the drive to reintegrate art and society or art and life. Yet just as the term “art” carries within it not only the exclusive notion of “fine art” but also the older sense of “an art,” so “aesthetic” can be either restricted to a detached contemplation aimed at fine art or reconceived to include ordinary sensuality and purpose. This reconstruction of the aesthetic is most prominently associated with John Dewey but has roots in some aspects of Baumgarten and Kant and, more particularly, in the tradition exemplified by Hogarth’s line of beauty,” Rousseau’s “temperate sensuality,” and Wollstonecraft’s joining of pleasure and political justice.

Many contemporary critics and philosophers have been exploring approaches to art and the aesthetic that do give a prominent place to ordinary pleasures and everyday functions (Berleant 1991; Leddy 1995; Sartwell 1995; Shusterman 2000). Carolyn Korsmeyer’s discussion of the symbolic meanings of the sensual pleasures of the palate is an important corrective to the traditional emphasis on distanced viewing and listening (i999)- Yuriko Saito suggests that we have a good deal to learn about an aesthetics of the everyday from certain traditional practices of Japan. Unlike the Western fine art system that has often taught people to direct a disinterested gaze on self-contained works, traditional Japanese culture valued sensory experiences of transient aspects of life: the pleasure of a bath, the sound of rain on a roof, the conversation and sounds of drinking at a tea ceremony. Similarly, the Japanese tradition gave equal value to formal beauty, craftsmanship, and function in such everyday things as the wrapping of packages or the design and use of utensils. Whereas mainstream Western aesthetics can treat a kitchen knife as if it were a work of art so long as function is subordinated to form, an aesthetic of the everyday would attend not only to the knife’s visual appearance but also to its “feeling in the hand ... its weight, and balance, but most importantly .. . how smoothly and effortlessly” it cuts (Saito 1999, 9)- Saito’s insights also suggest that true multiculturalism is not a matter of including a few Japanese or African examples in our art, music, or literature anthologies but an issue of learning from other cultures the limitations of our traditional categories.

But the arts have always had multiple functions, and among them, education has been central (Horace’s “please and instruct”). Arthur Danto’s rethinking of the cognitive role of art as “embodied meaning” has proved especially useful for illuminating some of the maddest and murkiest corners of the fine art world of the last half-century (Danto 1997, 2000). Whereas Danto’s philosophy still wrestles primarily with how to define art in the light of changes in the visual arts, Karol Berger focuses directly on the issue of function, refreshingly approaching it from the perspective of music and literature. For Berger, the highest function of the arts is to represent fictional worlds in ways that give us a new understanding of ourselves and our surroundings. Although versions of this view can be traced from Aristotle to Schiller and Hegel, Berger’s theory does not make edification a characteristic of the fine arts alone but recognizes a continuum between the everyday arts and high arts. Moreover, he deftly meets the greatest challenge for any contemporary mimetic view of the arts—the modernist drive toward abstraction, experimentation, and lack of closure—arguing that modernism itself mirrors the exhilarating and terrible freedom of the modern self to define its own identity (Berger 2000).

Here we touch on the nettlesome issue of art as a surrogate religion. Berger confronts the issue unflinchingly, arguing that the fine arts offer our secular and individualistic society more varied spiritual insights than do the historical religions, with their demand for conformity and claims of exclusivity. It is a complex and delicate issue. For a small segment of the cultured elite, the fine arts have indeed been invested with the kinds of feeling and commitment once reserved for traditional religions. Yet the anti-art movements of the early twentieth century and many of the parodic gestures of recent decades, have often aimed their sharpest barbs at just such lofty claims for art. As sources of spiritual insight and consolation, art and religion can be mutually enriching. Yet we need to unite this legitimate concern for finding spiritual significance in the fine arts with those uses and pleasures of the more ordinary arts that, as thinkers from Rousseau to Saito have reminded us, are also bearers of meaning.

Although the dichotomies of the fine art system have been severely weakened, they still have the capacity to distort many areas of experience, as we have seen. A third system of art transcending the divisions of the modern fine art system has yet to establish itself. But even if it were possible in some wild anti-art dream to dismantle existing institutions and replace the one-sided ideals of fine art with the norms of craft and popular art, we would simply be reversing an in-vidious polarity rather than healing a fracture that occurred long ago. The answer to art divided is obviously not to reject such ideals as freedom, imagination, and creativity but to unite them with facility, service, and function. Yet there is no magic formula for the correct balance. It would be silly to demand that every piece of music, literature, or visual art manifest an equal dose of imagination and skill, form and function, spiritual and sensual pleasure. And, rightly understood, there is a time and place for disinterested attention and formal analysis as well as for the renewed interest in beauty (Brand 2000; Scarry 2000). In pluralistic democracies there will probably always be multiple art worlds, including small coteries who will consider only the most daunting and esoteric or the most socially and politically shocking works to be “real art.” But most people will participate in several kinds of art worlds, moving across the old divisions and hierarchies and juggling more or less successfully the relationships among art, religion, politics, and everyday life.

In this book I have tried to show that (fine) art, as we have generally understood it, is neither eternal nor ancient but a historical construction of the eighteenth century, and I have traced a parallel tradition of resistance extending down to the present. I am also aware that “you can’t go home again.” We cannot resurrect the old system of art. Nor can we simply wish away the break that split apart the old system of art, arrogating intellect, imagination, and grace to fine art and disparaging craft and popular culture as the realm of mere technique, utility, entertainment, and profit. Like other dualisms that have plagued our culture, the divisions of the fine art system can only be transcended through a continuing struggle. I believe we do transcend them in practice from time to time; what is harder is naming and articulating what we have done.
