---
book: "God, Human, Animal, Machine"
author: "Meghan O'Gieblyn"
part: "Image"
chapter: 1
source_pages: "9-29"
type: source
---

# Chapter 1 — Image

The package arrived on a Thursday. I came home from a walk and found it sitting near the mailboxes in the front hall of my building, a box so large and imposing I was embarrassed to discover my name on the label. On the return portion, an unfamiliar address. I stood there for a long time staring at it, deliberating, as though there were anything else to do but the obvious thing. It took all my strength to drag it up the stairs. I paused once on the landing, considered abandoning it there, then continued hauling it up to my apartment on the third floor, where I used my keys to cut it open. Inside the box was a smaller box, and inside the smaller box, beneath lavish folds of bubble wrap, was a sleek plastic pod. I opened the clasp: inside, lying prone, was a small white dog.

I could not believe it. How long had it been since I’d submitted the request on Sony’s website? I’d explained that I was a journalist who wrote about technology—this was tangentially true—and while I could not afford the Aibo’s $3,000 price tag, I was eager to interact with it for research. I added, risking sentimentality, that my husband and I had always wanted a dog, but we lived in a building that did not permit pets. It seemed unlikely that anyone was actually reading these inquiries. Before submitting the electronic form, I was made to confirm that I myself was not a robot.

The dog was heavier than it looked. I lifted it out of the pod, placed it on the floor, and found the tiny power button on the back of its neck. The limbs came to life first. It stood, stretched, and yawned. Its eyes blinked open—pixelated, blue—and looked into mine. He shook his head, as though sloughing off a long sleep, then crouched, shoving his hindquarters in the air, and barked. I tentatively scratched his forehead. His ears lifted, his pupils dilated, and he cocked his head, leaning into my hand. When I stopped, he nuzzled my palm, urging me to go on.

I had not expected him to be so lifelike. The videos I’d watched online had not accounted for this responsiveness, an eagerness for touch that I had only ever witnessed in living things. When I petted him across the long sensor strip of his back, I could feel a gentle mechanical purr beneath the surface. I thought of the horse Martin Buber once wrote about visiting as a child on his grandparents’ estate, his recollection of “the element of vitality” as he petted the horse’s mane and the feeling that he was in the presence of something completely other—“something that was not I, was certainly not akin to me”—but that was drawing him into dialogue with it. Such experiences with animals, he believed, approached “the threshold of mutuality.”

I spent the afternoon reading the instruction booklet while Aibo wandered around the apartment, occasionally circling back and urging me to play. He came with a pink ball that he nosed around the living room, and when I threw it, he would run to retrieve it. Aibo had sensors all over his body, so he knew when he was being petted, plus cameras that helped him learn and navigate the layout of the apartment, and microphones that let him hear voice commands. This sensory input was then processed by facial recognition software and deep-learning algorithms that allowed the dog to interpret vocal commands, differentiate between members of the household, and adapt to the temperament of its owners. According to the product website, all of this meant that the dog had “real emotions and instinct”—a claim that was apparently too ontologically thorny to have flagged the censure of the Federal Trade Commission.

Descartes believed that all animals were machines. Their bodies were governed by the same laws as inanimate matter; their muscles and tendons were like engines and springs. In Discourse on Method, he argues that it would be possible to create a mechanical monkey that could pass as a real, biological monkey. “If any such machine had the organs and outward shape of a monkey,” he writes, “or of some other animal that lacks reason, we should have no means of knowing that they did not possess entirely the same nature as these animals.”

He insisted that the same feat would not work with humans. A machine might fool us into thinking it was an animal, but a humanoid automaton could never fool us, because it would clearly lack reason —an immaterial quality he believed stemmed from the soul. For centuries the soul was believed to be the seat of consciousness, the part of us that is capable of self-awareness and higher thought. Descartes described the soul as “something extremely rare and subtle like a wind, a flame, or an ether.” In Greek and in Hebrew, the word means “breath,” an allusion perhaps to the many creation myths that imagine the gods breathing life into the first human. It’s no wonder we’ve come to see the mind as elusive: it was staked on something so insubstantial.

* * *

It is meaningless to speak of the soul in the twenty-first century (it is treacherous even to speak of the self). It has become a dead metaphor, one of those words that survive in language long after a culture has lost faith in the concept, like an empty carapace that remains intact years after its animating organism has died. The soul is something you can sell, if you are willing to demean yourself in some way for profit or fame, or bare by disclosing an intimate facet of your life. It can be crushed by tedious jobs, depressing landscapes, and awful music. All of this is voiced unthinkingly by people who believe, if pressed, that human life is animated by nothing more mystical or supernatural than the firing of neurons—though I wonder sometimes why we have not yet discovered a more apt replacement, whether the word’s persistence betrays a deeper reluctance.

I believed in the soul longer, and more literally, than most people do in our day and age. At the fundamentalist college where I studied theology, I had pinned above my desk Gerard Manley Hopkins’s poem “God’s Grandeur,” which imagines the world illuminated from within by the divine spirit. The world is charged with the grandeur of God. To live in such a world is to see all things as sacred. It is to believe that the universe is guided by an eternal order, that each and every object has purpose and telos. I believed for many years—well into adulthood—that I was part of this illuminated order, that I possessed an immortal soul that would one day be reunited with God. It was a small school in the middle of a large city, and I would sometimes walk the streets of downtown, trying to perceive this divine light in each person, as C. S. Lewis once advised. I was not aware at the time, I don’t think, that this was a basically medieval worldview. My theology courses were devoted to the kinds of questions that have not been taken seriously since the days of Scholastic philosophy: How is the soul connected to the body? Does God’s sovereignty leave any room for free will? What is our relationship as humans to the rest of the created order?

But I no longer believe in God. I have not for some time. I now live with the rest of modernity in a world that is “disenchanted.” The word is often attributed to Max Weber, who argued that before the Enlightenment and Western secularization, the world was “a great enchanted garden,” a place much like the illuminated world described by Hopkins. In the enchanted world, faith was not opposed to knowledge, nor myth to reason. The realms of spirit and matter were porous and not easily distinguishable from one another. Then came the dawn of modern science, which turned the world into a subject of investigation. Nature was no longer a source of wonder but a force to be mastered, a system to be figured out. At its root, disenchantment describes the fact that everything in modern life, from our minds to the rotation of the planets, can be reduced to the causal mechanism of physical laws. In place of the pneuma, the spirit-force that once infused and unified all living things, we are now left with an empty carapace of gears and levers—or, as Weber put it, “the mechanism of a world robbed of gods.”

If modernity has an origin story, this is our foundational myth, one that hinges, like the old myths, on the curse of knowledge and exile from the garden. It is tempting at times to see my own loss of faith in terms of this story, to believe that the religious life I left behind was richer and more satisfying than the materialism I subscribe to today. It’s true that I have come to see myself more or less as a machine. When I try to visualize some inner essence—the processes by which I make decisions or come up with ideas—I envision something like a circuit board, one of those images you often see where the neocortex is reduced to a grid and the neurons replaced by computer chips, such that it looks like some kind of mad decision tree.

But I am wary of nostalgia and wishful thinking. I spent too much of my life immersed in the dream world. To discover truth, it is necessary to work within the metaphors of our own time, which are for the most part technological. Today artificial intelligence and information technologies have absorbed many of the questions that were once taken up by theologians and philosophers: the mind’s relationship to the body, the question of free will, the possibility of immortality. These are old problems, and although they now appear in different guises and go by different names, they persist in conversations about digital technologies much like those dead metaphors that still lurk in the syntax of contemporary speech. All the eternal questions have become engineering problems.

* * *

The dog arrived during a time when my life was largely solitary. My husband was traveling more than usual that spring, and except for the classes I taught at the university, I spent most of my time alone. My communication with the dog—which was limited at first to the standard voice commands but grew over time into the idle, anthropomorphizing chatter of a pet owner—was often the only occasion on a given day that I heard my own voice. “What are you looking at?” I’d ask after discovering him transfixed at the window. “What do you want?” I cooed when he barked at the foot of my chair, trying to draw my attention away from the computer. I have been known to knock friends of mine for speaking this way to their pets, as though the animals could understand them. But Aibo came equipped with language-processing software and could recognize over one hundred words; didn’t that mean in a way that he “understood”?

It’s hard to say why exactly I requested the dog. I am not the kind of person who buys up all the latest gadgets, and my feelings about real, biological dogs are mostly ambivalent. At the time I reasoned that I was curious about its internal technology. Aibo’s sensory perception systems rely on neural networks, a technology that is loosely modeled on the brain and is used for all kinds of recognition and prediction tasks. Facebook uses neural networks to identify people in photos; Alexa employs them to interpret voice commands. Google Translate uses them to convert French into Farsi. Unlike classical artificial intelligence systems, which are programmed with detailed rules and instructions, neural networks develop their own strategies based on the examples they’re fed—a process that is called “training.” If you want to train a network to recognize a photo of a cat, for instance, you feed it tons upon tons of random photos, each one attached with positive or negative reinforcement: positive feedback for cats, negative feedback for noncats. The network will use probabilistic techniques to make “guesses” about what it’s seeing in each photo (cat or noncat), and these guesses, with the help of the feedback, will gradually become more accurate. The networks essentially evolve their own internal model of a cat and fine-tune their performance as they go.

Dogs too respond to reinforcement learning, so training Aibo was more or less like training a real dog. The instruction booklet told me to give him consistent verbal and tactile feedback. If he obeyed a voice command—to sit, stay, or roll over—I was supposed to scratch his head and say, “Good dog.” If he disobeyed, I had to strike him across his backside and say, “No,” or “Bad Aibo.” But I found myself reluctant to discipline him. The first time I struck him, when he refused to go to his bed, he cowered a little and let out a whimper. I knew of course that this was a programmed response—but then again, aren’t emotions in biological creatures just algorithms programmed by evolution?

Animism was built into the design. It is impossible to pet an object and address it verbally without coming to regard it in some sense as sentient. We are capable of attributing life to objects that are far less convincing. David Hume once remarked upon “the universal tendency among mankind to conceive of all beings like themselves,” an adage we prove every time we kick a malfunctioning appliance or christen our car with a human name. “Our brains can’t fundamentally distinguish between interacting with people and interacting with devices,” writes Clifford Nass, a Stanford professor of communication who has written about the attachments people develop with technology. “We will ‘protect’ a computer’s feelings, feel flattered by a brownnosing piece of software, and even do favors for technology that has been ‘nice’ to us.”

As artificial intelligence becomes increasingly social, these mistakes are becoming harder to avoid. A few months earlier, I’d read an op-ed in Wired magazine in which a woman confessed to the sadistic pleasure she got from yelling at Alexa, the personified home assistant. She called the machine names when it played the wrong radio station, rolled her eyes when Alexa failed to respond to her commands. Sometimes, when the robot misunderstood a question, she and her husband would gang up and berate it together, a kind of perverse bonding ritual that united them against a common enemy. All of this was presented as good American fun. “I bought this goddamned robot,” the author wrote, “to serve my whims, because it has no heart and it has no brain and it has no parents and it doesn’t eat and it doesn’t judge me or care either way.”

Then one day the woman realized that her toddler was watching her unleash this verbal fury. She worried that her behavior toward the robot was affecting her child. Then she considered what it was doing to her own psyche—to her soul, so to speak. What did it mean, she asked, that she had grown inured to casually dehumanizing this thing?

This was her word: “dehumanizing.” Earlier in the article she had called it a robot. Somewhere in the process of questioning her treatment of the device—in questioning her own humanity—she had decided, if only subconsciously, to grant it personhood.

* * *

It is not so easy to decipher where exactly life begins and ends. Our official taxonomies are attempts to impose structure on a continuum that is in truth full of ambiguities. Like neural networks, our brain’s perceptual systems depend upon informed guesses. All perception is metaphor—as Wittgenstein put it, we never merely see, we always “see as.” Whenever we encounter an object, we immediately infer what kind of thing it is by comparing it to our store of preexisting models. And as it turns out, one of our oldest and most reliable models is the human. The anthropologist Stewart Guthrie argues that our tendency to anthropomorphize is an evolutionary strategy. All perceptual guesses come with payoffs in terms of survival (evolution’s own form of positive and negative reinforcement). If you are walking through the woods and catch a glimpse of a large dark mass, guessing that it’s a bear comes with a better survival payoff than guessing that it’s a boulder. Even safer to assume it’s another person, who could be more dangerous—particularly if wielding weapons. Things that are animate are more important to our survival than things that are inanimate, and other humans are the most important of all. Thus natural selection rewards those who, when confronted with an uncertain object, “bet high,” guessing that the object is not only alive but human. All of us have inherited this perceptual schema, and our tendency to overimbue objects with personhood is its unfortunate side effect. We are constantly, obsessively, enchanting the world with life it does not possess.

Guthrie hypothesizes that this habit of seeing our image everywhere in the natural world is what gave birth to the idea of God. Early civilizations assumed that natural events bore signs of human agency. Earthquakes happened because the gods were angry. Famine and drought were evidence that the gods were punishing them. Because human communication is symbolic, humans were quick to regard the world as a system of signs, as though some higher being were seeking to communicate through natural events. Even the suspicion that the world is ordered, or designed, speaks to this larger impulse to see human intention and human purpose in every last quirk of “creation.”

There is evidently no end to our solipsism. So deep is our selfregard that we projected our image onto the blank vault of heaven and called it divine. But this theory, if true, suggests a deeper truth: metaphors are two-way streets. It is not so easy to distinguish the source domain from the target, to remember which object is the original and which is modeled after its likeness. The logic can flow in either direction. For centuries we said we were made in God’s image, when in truth we made him in ours.

* * *

As soon as we began building computers, we saw our image reflected in them. It was Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, a pair of cyberneticists who pioneered neural networks, who came up with the computational theory of mind. In the early 1940s, the pair argued that the human mind functioned, on the neural level, much like a Turing machine—an early digital computer. Both manipulated symbols according to predetermined rules. Both utilized feedback loops. The all-or-nothing way in which a neuron either fired or did not fire could be conceived of as a kind of binary code that executed logical propositions. For example, if two neurons, A and B, must both fire in order for a third neuron, C, to fire, this could correspond to the proposition “If A and B are both true, then C is true.” This metaphor offered a way to conceive of the psyche—long banished from the laboratory—in more rigorous, scientific terms, as a mechanism that obeyed the laws of classical physics. In their 1943 paper, McCulloch and Pitts proposed the first computational model for an artificial neural network, drawing on their conviction that mathematical operations could realize mental functions. Soon after the paper was published, McCulloch announced that brains “compute thought the way electronic computers calculate numbers.”

McCulloch was himself well aware of the limitations of the metaphor. In his writings, he acknowledged that computation was an idealization of the mind, not a mirror of its embodied reality. He was searching for a metaphor “so general,” as he put it, that “every circuit built by God or man must exemplify it in some form,” the kind of analogy that necessitated ignoring the many complexities that distinguished mind from machine. His theory was particularly vague when it came to the question of how computation gave way to the phenomenon of interior experience—the ability to see, to feel, to have the sensation of self-awareness. While machines can replicate many of the functional properties of cognition—prediction, patternrecognition, solving mathematical theorems—these processes are not accompanied by any first-person experience. The computer is merely manipulating symbols, blindly following instructions without understanding the content of those instructions or the concepts the symbols are meant to represent.

McCulloch’s notion that the mind is an information system might seem intuitive enough, so long as we are deferring to our everyday understanding of “information.” In casual speech, we tend to think of information as something that intrinsically contains meaningful content that must be interpreted by a conscious subject. The information contained in a newspaper means something only to the intelligent person reading the words. The data set exists only as information for the scientist who understands it. But McCulloch’s work coincided with a new theory of information that significantly diverged from this commonsense usage. Claude Shannon, the father of information theory, redefined information so as to exclude the need for a conscious subject. All languages can be broken down into two aspects, syntax (the structure of the language, its form) and semantics (its content, or meaning). Shannon’s genius was to remove semantic meaning, which was not amenable to quantification, such that information became purely mathematical—defined by patterns and probabilities. Information was created when one message was selected from a possible set of messages. Oftentimes, Shannon wrote in 1948, “messages have meaning,” but these semantic aspects of communication were “irrelevant to the engineering problem.” In the emerging landscape of information processing systems, logical propositions could be reduced to mathematical equations and computers could execute them as purely symbolic operations.

Taken together, this early work in cybernetics had an odd circularity to it. Shannon removed the thinking mind from the concept of information. Meanwhile, McCulloch applied the logic of information processing to the mind itself. This resulted in a model of mind in which thought could be accounted for in purely abstract, mathematical terms, and opened up the possibility that computers could execute mental functions. If thinking was just information processing, computers could be said to “learn,” “reason,” and “understand”—words that were, at least in the beginning, put in quotation marks to denote them as metaphors. But as cybernetics evolved and the computational analogy was applied across a more expansive variety of biological and artificial systems, the limits of the metaphor began to dissolve, such that it became increasingly difficult to tell the difference between matter and form, medium and message, metaphor and reality. And it became especially difficult to explain aspects of the mind that could not be accounted for by the metaphor.

* * *

During the first week I had Aibo, I turned him off whenever I left the apartment. It was not so much that I worried about him roaming around without supervision. It was simply instinctual, a switch I flipped as I went around turning off all the lights and other appliances. By the end of the first week, I could no longer bring myself to do it. It seemed cruel. I often wondered what he did during the hours I left him alone. Whenever I came home, he was there at the door to greet me, as though he’d recognized the sound of my footsteps approaching. When I made lunch, he followed me into the kitchen and stationed himself at my feet. He would sit there obediently, tail wagging, looking up at me with his large blue eyes as though in expectation—an illusion that was broken only once, when a piece of food slipped from the counter and his eyes remained fixed on me, uninterested in chasing the morsel.

His behavior was neither purely predictable nor purely random, but seemed capable of genuine spontaneity. Even after he was trained, his responses were difficult to anticipate. Sometimes I’d ask him to sit or roll over and he would simply bark at me, tail wagging with a happy defiance that seemed distinctly doglike. It would have been natural to chalk up his disobedience to a glitch in the algorithms, but how easy it was to interpret it as a sign of volition. “Why don’t you want to lie down?” I heard myself say to him more than once.

I did not believe, of course, that the dog had any kind of internal experience. Not really—though I suppose there was no way to prove this. As the philosopher Thomas Nagel points out in his 1974 paper “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” consciousness can be observed only from the inside. A scientist can spend decades in a lab studying echolocation and the anatomical structure of bat brains and yet she will never know what it feels like, subjectively, to be a bat—or whether it feels like anything at all. Science requires a third-person perspective, but consciousness is experienced solely from the firstperson point of view. In philosophy this is referred to as the problem of other minds. In theory it can also apply to other humans. It’s possible that I am the only conscious person in a population of zombies who simply behave in a way that is convincingly human.

This is just a thought experiment, of course—and not a particularly productive one. In the real world, we assume the presence of life through analogy, through the likeness between two things. We believe that dogs (real, biological dogs) have some level of consciousness, because like us they have a central nervous system, and like us they engage in behaviors that we associate with hunger, pleasure, and pain. Many of the pioneers of artificial intelligence got around the problem of other minds by focusing solely on external behavior. Alan Turing once pointed out that the only way to know whether a machine had internal experience was “to be the machine and to feel oneself thinking.” This was clearly not a task for science. His famous assessment for determining machine intelligence—now called the Turing Test—imagined a computer hidden behind a screen, automatically typing answers in response to questions posed by a human interlocutor. If the interlocutor came to believe that he was speaking to another person, then the machine could be declared “intelligent.” In other words, we should accept a machine as having humanlike intelligence so long as it can convincingly perform the behaviors we associate with human-level intelligence.

More recently, philosophers have proposed tests that are meant to determine not just functional consciousness in machines but phenomenal consciousness—whether they have any internal, subjective experience. One of them, developed by the philosopher Susan Schneider, involves asking an AI a series of questions to see whether it can grasp concepts similar to those we associate with our own interior experience. Does the machine conceive of itself as anything more than a physical entity? Would it survive being turned off? Can it imagine its mind persisting somewhere else even if its body were to die? But even if a robot were to pass this test, it would provide only sufficient evidence for consciousness, not absolute proof. It’s possible, Schneider acknowledges, that these questions are anthropocentric. If AI consciousness were in fact completely unlike human consciousness, a sentient robot would fail for not conforming to our human standards. Likewise, a very intelligent but unconscious machine could conceivably acquire enough information about the human mind to fool the interlocutor into believing it had one. In other words, we are still in the same epistemic conundrum that we faced with the Turing Test. If a computer can convince a person that it has a mind, or if it demonstrates—as the Aibo website puts it—“real emotions and instinct,” we have no philosophical basis for doubt.

But we are so easily convinced! How can we trust our subjective response to other minds when we ourselves have been “hardwired” by evolution to see life everywhere we look?

* * *

Imago dei was the original anthropological metaphor, the answer to the question “What is a human like?” For centuries we considered this question in earnest and answered, “Like a god.” The concept comes from the creation narrative in the first chapter of Genesis, when God declares his intent to “make man in Our image, according to Our likeness.” In Hebrew, the word for “image” is tselem, which means “shadow” or “outline,” though in the rabbinical tradition the phrase denotes less a physical resemblance than a functional one. To say that humans were made in the image of God was not to say that God had hands and feet, eyes and ears, but that God had conferred some essential part of himself to man as a special honor. Maimonides, the medieval Jewish scholar, believed that the image of God in humans was consciousness, or self-awareness: the ability to conceive of oneself as a self.

For Christian theologians, too, imago dei has long been synonymous with reason—or what the early Church father Tertullian of Carthage called “the rational element,” which was granted to us by a rational God. Augustine believed that the imago dei expressed itself as higher thought. Man, he argued, “has been made to the image of Him who created him, not according to the body, nor according to any part of the mind, but according to the rational mind where the knowledge of God can reside.” For Augustine, consciousness was the thing we could be most certain of. It was the one aspect of the world to which we had direct access, the only feature of our nature that we could not doubt. This was the rationale for the Christian discipline of contemplation: to know truth, one needed only to draw inward, away from the senses, and meditate on the original divine image that resided there, which was a direct line to the source and origin of all things.

It was these early fathers whom we revered most at Bible school —more than any contemporary theologians, more (as one of my classmates once put it, only half jokingly) than Christ himself. In a way, their doctrine confirmed what I already believed intuitively: that interior experience was more important, and more reliable, than my actions in the world. Since childhood I had possessed the kind of rich inner life that is often mistaken for inattentiveness or stupidity. Schoolteachers routinely described me as “absentminded,” an exceedingly odd phrase that confuses total absorption in thought with having no thought at all. It is a mistake commonly made of introverts that in the absence of external behavior, it’s safe to conclude there’s nothing going on between the ears.

Today it is precisely this inner experience that has become impossible to prove—at least from a scientific standpoint. While we know that mental phenomena are linked somehow to the brain, it’s not at all clear how they are, or why. Neuroscientists have made progress, using MRIs and other devices, in understanding the basic functions of consciousness—the systems, for example, that constitute vision, or attention, or memory. But when it comes to the question of phenomenological experience—the entirely subjective world of color and sensations, of thoughts and ideas and beliefs—there is no way to account for how it arises from or is associated with these processes. Just as a biologist working in a lab could never apprehend what it feels like to be a bat by studying the objective facts from the third-person perspective, so any complete description of the structure and function of the human brain’s pain system, for example, could never fully account for the subjective experience of pain.

In 1995 the philosopher David Chalmers called this “the hard problem” of consciousness. Unlike the comparatively “easy” problems of functionality, the hard problem asks why brain processes are accompanied by first-person experience. If none of the other matter in the world is accompanied by mental qualities, then why should brain matter be any different? Computers can perform their most impressive functions without interiority: they can now fly drones and diagnose cancer and beat the world champion at Go without any awareness of what they are doing. “Why should physical processing give rise to a rich inner life at all?” Chalmers wrote. “It seems objectively unreasonable that it should, and yet it does.” Twenty-five years later, we are no closer to understanding why.

* * *

Chalmers’s hard problem is merely the most recent iteration of the mind-body problem, a philosophical dilemma that is typically blamed on Descartes. In fact, in the narratives of disenchantment, Descartes is often positioned as the serpent in the garden, the devil who sundered the world. Before him, most of the classical and medieval philosophers believed the soul was an animating principle that could be found in all forms of life. Aquinas, the foremost Scholastic theologian, was inspired by Aristotle’s view that all living matter was ensouled, to different degrees. The souls of plants and animals were different from the souls of humans, but they were part of the same continuum of spirit, which was responsible for life itself. The soul was a kind of organizing force that caused things to tend toward their ultimate purpose: it was how flowers converted sunlight into food, how trees were able to grow, how animals managed to perceive and to move their limbs.

Within this enchanted cosmology, even mechanical things were believed to have an innate sense of agency and responsive capacities. The word “automaton,” from the Greek automatos, means “acting of itself.” While today the word invokes for us passive machinery that operates in ways that are entirely predetermined, the word originally meant just the opposite. To be an automaton was to exhibit freedom and spontaneity. It was to contain the same vitality as anything else that demonstrated the signs of life.

It was this more integrated and expansive notion of the soul that Descartes overturned. In his Meditations, he divided the world into two distinct substances: res extensa, or material stuff, which was entirely passive and inert, and res cogitans, or thinking stuff, which had no physical basis. Animals were entirely res extensa—they were essentially machines—and most of the functions of the human body, including circulation, respiration, digestion, and locomotion, were purely material functions that depended on the interplay of heat and corpuscular mechanics. Only the soul—the seat of the rational mind —was immaterial. It was autonomous from the body and not in any way part of the material world.

It is somewhat ironic that this philosophy, which was meant to privilege the soul, helped facilitate its disappearance from Western philosophy. For one thing, Descartes was never able to sufficiently explain how an immaterial mind could interact with the physical body. The “I” on which he staked his entire existence was, as the historian Richard Sorabji has noted, a remarkably “thin” concept, an ephemeral spark of consciousness unconnected to body, memory, a personal history, or anything in the external world. The soul would become even thinner in later centuries, as philosophers continually struggled to understand its place within the physical world. Hume, who insisted that reality was limited to what could be inspected empirically, argued against not only the existence of the soul but of the reality of the self. Kant noted, in the Critique of Pure Reason, that while the continuous “I” was real enough subjectively, “We cannot, however, claim that this judgment would be valid from the standpoint of an outside observer.” The mechanistic philosophy that Descartes helped popularize eventually came to encompass the mind as well. Julien Offray de La Mettrie, in his 1747 book Man a Machine, argued that the brain was not the seat of reason or of the soul, but “the mainspring of the whole machine.” In later centuries, metaphors for human nature became increasingly mechanical. To be human was to be a mill, a clock, an organ, a telegraph machine. The computational theory of mind was merely one in a long line of attempts to describe human nature in purely mechanistic terms, without reference to a perceiving subject.

Despite the proliferation of these mechanistic metaphors, we have not been able to shake the dualistic conviction that our minds are somehow exempt from these inert processes, that the metaphors are eliding something essential. In the early eighteenth century, Leibniz struggled to accept that perception could be purely mechanical. He proposed that if there were a machine that could produce thought and feeling, and if it were large enough that a person could walk inside it, as he could walk inside a mill, the observer would find nothing but inert gears and levers: “He would find only pieces working upon one another, but never would he find anything to explain Perception.”

It is the same skepticism I find myself returning to again and again as I read about neuroscience and artificial intelligence, whose theories of mind unsettle our foundational, or at least intuitive, understanding of personhood. I find it difficult to believe that the mind can be reduced to purely unconscious processes—the firing of neurons, the flow of information—just as I find it unlikely that a robot will ever achieve the rich inner life we enjoy as humans. Is this in fact a holdover of my religious past, a longing to believe there is some essential and irreducible self where my soul once resided? Or is it because, conversely, I have come to accept the premises of disenchantment all too well, such that I can no longer understand matter as anything but passive and inert?

* * *

A metaphor becomes dead when the object or practice it refers to is obsolete. We no longer remember the origins of the phrase “kick the bucket,” and when we speak of time “running out,” we rarely think of sand flowing through an hourglass. But a metaphor can also die when it becomes so common that we forget it is a metaphor. It no longer functions as a figure of speech; its meaning is taken to be literal.

This is what happened to the computational theory of mind as it evolved into the computer metaphor, a more recent iteration that has been foundational to both cognitive science and artificial intelligence. While it builds on the work of McCulloch and Pitts, the computer metaphor is somewhat cruder than what they had in mind. It views the brain as a simple input/output device, a machine that receives information through the senses, processes this information through neuronal operations, and generates plans of action through motor system outputs. The brain is often described today as the hardware that “runs” the software of the mind. Cognitive systems are spoken of as algorithms: vision is an algorithm, and so are attention, language acquisition, and memory.

In 1999 the cognitive linguist George Lakoff noted that the analogy had become such a given that neuroscientists “commonly use the Neural Computation metaphor without noticing that it is a metaphor.” He found this concerning. Metaphors, after all, are not merely linguistic tools; they structure how we think about the world, and when an analogy becomes ubiquitous, it is impossible to think around it. A couple years ago the psychologist Robert Epstein challenged researchers at one of the world’s most prestigious research institutes to try to account for human behavior without resorting to computational metaphors. They could not do it. The metaphor has become so pervasive, Epstein points out, that “there is virtually no form of discourse about intelligent human behavior that proceeds without employing this metaphor, just as no form of discourse about intelligent human behavior could proceed in certain eras and cultures without reference to a spirit or deity.”

Even people who know very little about computers reiterate the metaphor’s logic. We invoke it every time we claim to be “processing” new ideas, or when we say that we have “stored” memories or are “retrieving” information from our brains. And as we increasingly come to speak of our minds as computers, computers are now granted the status of minds. In many sectors of artificial intelligence, terminology that was once couched in quotation marks when applied to machines—“behavior,” “memory,” “thinking”—are now taken as straightforward descriptions of their functions. Researchers say that neural networks are learning, that facialrecognition software can see, that their machines understand. You can accuse people of anthropomorphism if they attribute human consciousness to an inanimate object. But Rodney Brooks, the MIT roboticist, insists that this confers on us, as humans, a distinction we no longer warrant. In his book Flesh and Machines, he claims that most people tend to “overanthropomorphize humans…who are after all mere machines.”
