---
book: "God, Human, Animal, Machine"
author: "Meghan O'Gieblyn"
part: "Network"
chapter: 6
source_pages: "97-109"
type: source
---

# Chapter 6 — Network

In her essay “Teaching a Stone to Talk,” Annie Dillard writes that on the island where she lives, off the coast of Washington State, there is a man named Larry who lives alone in a shack on the cliff and has dedicated his life to teaching a stone to talk. The man keeps the rock on a shelf, covered with a piece of leather, and unveils it several times each day for its lessons. Dillard admits that she has no idea what goes on in these lessons, but she imagines he is attempting to teach the stone a single word, like “cup,” or “uncle.” Nobody makes wisecracks about this enterprise; in fact everyone in town, herself included, treats his efforts with the utmost respect. “I wish him well,” she writes. “It is noble work, and beats, from any angle, selling shoes.”

After opening with this strange anecdote, Dillard proceeds to offer a sweeping meditation on the disenchantment of nature. Whereas once the world was a sacred and holy place, full of chatty and companionable objects—rocks and trees that were capable of communicating with us—we now lived in a world that has been rendered mute. “Nature’s silence is its own remark,” she writes, “and every flake of the world is a chip off that old mute and immutable block.” We still long to return at times to the ancient cosmology and make every effort to coax nature back into dialogue with us. But in the end, Dillard is decidedly pessimistic about the possibility of return. The enchanted world is, she notes, “the show we drove from town.” In one passage she creatively reimagines the scene at Sinai when God appears to the exiled nation of Israel and scares them witless with his thundering voice. The people beg him never to speak again, and he agrees. The point is clear: we did this to ourselves. It was we who insisted that the spirits leave, we who exiled ourselves from the garden. “It is difficult to undo our own damage,” she writes, “and to recall to our presence that which we have asked to leave… The very holy mountains are keeping mum. We doused the burning bush and cannot rekindle it; we are lighting matches in vain under every green tree.”

Dillard’s essay is among a subset of disenchantment narratives that place the fall from grace much earlier—not with the Enlightenment and the rise of modern science but with the emergence of monotheism. Wasn’t it, after all, the very notion of imago dei—that humans had some special distinction, a solitary romance with God—that caused us to believe we were distinct from the rest of nature and brought about our alienation? The verses in Genesis that christen humanity with God’s image are followed by God granting Adam “dominion” over creation, forever linking human exceptionalism with the degradation of the natural world. But Dillard’s essay raises a worthwhile question: Given that our culture is imprinted with Judeo-Christian narratives and the philosophical traditions that built on them, is it possible to go back? Or are these narratives embedded so deeply in the DNA of our ontological assumptions that a return is impossible? This is especially difficult when it comes to our efforts to create life from ordinary matter—to make our own stones come to life. In the orthodox forms of Judaism and Christianity, the ability to summon life from inert matter is denounced as paganism, witchcraft, or idolatry.

This fear of black magic has haunted modern robotics from its inception. It was still strong enough by the middle of the last century that Alan Turing felt compelled to address what he called the “theological objection” to AI. In his landmark 1950 paper “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Turing summed up the theological objection, as commonly expressed, as follows: “God has given an immortal soul to every man and woman, but not to any other animal or to machines. Hence no animal or machine can think.” Turing himself was a stark materialist and confessed that he was “unable to accept any part of this”—this being the very idea that God, or the soul, exists. But for the sake of argument he took the objection seriously and attempted to answer it on its own terms. The problem with the theological objection, he argued, was that it restricted God’s omnipotence. If God is truly all-powerful, could he not give a soul to an elephant if he saw fit? If so, then he could presumably do the same for a machine. This act of divine intervention, he claimed, was not so different from procreation: the physical process is accomplished through the activities of humans—sex and conception —and yet no one would give the parents credit for granting a soul to their child. It’s understood that God intervenes at some point and inspirits the physical body of the child. “In attempting to construct such machines,” Turing argued, “we should not be irreverently usurping His power of creating souls, any more than we are in the procreation of children: rather we are, in either case, instruments of His will providing mansions for the souls that He creates.”

As arguments go, this is remarkably clumsy. All Turing’s response proves is what the theological objection held in the first place: that humans are incapable of creating intelligent life; that such a feat would require something else—a soul, consciousness—that was not accounted for in Turing’s mechanistic understanding of personhood. Turing and his colleagues, after all, were not creating “mansions” to be supernaturally inhabited by an immortal soul; they believed their machines amounted to life itself.

* * *

When Brooks and Breazeal were working on their robots at MIT, a German theologian named Anne Foerst, who’d become interested in robotics, was embedded with their team. During a stint at the Harvard Divinity School archives, she wandered over to MIT and convinced Brooks to let her hang out at the Media Lab to witness the engineers and programmers at work. Foerst quickly became enchanted by the robots—especially Kismet, with whom she developed a strong emotional bond. She recalls feeling jealous when others managed to get the robot’s attention and pleased when the machine’s expressions and voice seemed to respond to her own. Throughout the months she spent at the lab, she struggled to reconcile the lifelike nature of these machines with her belief that humans were made in the image of God. “As our technical creatures become more like us, they raise fundamental theological questions,” she writes in her book on the experience, God in the Machine. “I had learned in theology to understand humans as special, elected by God to be God’s partners.” However, the notion that we ourselves could build intelligent machines in our image assumed “that humans are nothing more than machines, bags of skin that can be rebuilt.”

In the end she tried to harmonize this tension between science and religion by appealing to mystical Judaism. Within this tradition, it is believed that letters and numbers are the building blocks of creation. According to the Sefer Yetzirah, one of the earliest books of Jewish mysticism, the totality of the universe is undergirded by mystical combinations of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, a kind of cosmic code that preceded matter and is inherent in every worldly thing. The very fabric of reality is informational. In the practical Kabbalah, a branch of this tradition that teaches the use of divinely sanctified magic, it is believed that humans can manipulate these numbers and letters in order to animate the inanimate. Throughout the Middle Ages this mystic tradition produced many golem stories, in which humans shaped androids out of clay and brought them to life with magical incantations. In some stories these incantations are specifically identified as mathematical permutations. Humans are able to achieve this, according to Kabbalah, because they are made in the image of God and endowed with the same creative capacities. Foerst notes that the golems were, on one hand, tools designed to help humankind and make their lives easier. But they were also attempts to understand God and God’s creation. “The construction of humanoid robots follows this search for partnership,” Foerst writes. Artificial intelligence was both a form of worship and “a repetition of God’s act of creating us.”

One of the most famous golem stories is that of Jehuda Löw, the Maharal of Prague. Rabbi Löw was said to have built a golem named Joseph to help the Jews of Prague protect their ghetto, which was often attacked by Christians. The golem stood at the entrance to the ghetto all night as a sentinel and during the day helped the residents with their labor. Joseph—like most golems in these narratives—could become animate only when it held within its mouth a paper containing God’s name. Rabbi Löw was unsure whether to consider Joseph a machine or a child of God, but to be on the safe side, he decided to take the paper with God’s name out of the golem each Friday, forcing it to keep the Sabbath. One Friday, however, the rabbi forgot to take out the paper, and the golem turned violent, wreaking havoc on the entire community and, in some versions of the story, killing the rabbi. This ending echoes the theme of hubris that appears in so many myths about the human attempt to create life. But another iteration of the story has a more hopeful ending. In this version the rabbi manages to retrieve the paper from the golem’s mouth and sets it to rest in the attic of the synagogue. Rabbi Löw then invents a kabbalistic rhyme that will awaken the golem at the end of time. For many centuries boys who belonged to the tradition of Eastern European Jews who descended from Rabbi Löw were told at their bar mitzvah the secret formula that could awaken the golem.

At one point in her book, Foerst relays an anecdote she heard at MIT, one that is so bizarre I initially hesitated to include it here—though I later found it corroborated in other sources. The story goes back to the 1960s, when the Media Lab was overseen by the famous roboticist Marvin Minsky, a period now considered the “cradle of AI.” One day two MIT graduate students, Gerry Sussman and Joel Moses, were chatting during a break with a handful of other students. Someone mentioned offhandedly that the first big computer, which was constructed in Israel, had been called Golem. This led to a general discussion of the golem stories, and Susssman proceeded to tell his colleagues that he was a descendent of Rabbi Löw, and at his bar mitzvah his grandfather had taken him aside and told him the rhyme that would awaken the golem at the end of time. At this, Moses, awestruck, revealed that he too was a descendent of Rabbi Löw and had also been given the magical incantation at his bar mitzvah by his grandfather. The two men agreed to write out the incantation separately on pieces of paper, and when they showed them to each other, the formula—despite being passed down for centuries as a purely oral tradition—was identical. At this point Minsky emerged from his office to find his students in a kind of stunned silence. He asked what they’d been discussing, and when they told him, he said, “You believe this? Look, right after my bar mitzvah, I was told the same thing by my grandfather. But you think I believed it?” Minsky was a notorious rationalist who regarded religion as fundamentally at odds with the scientific endeavor. When his students asked him about the incantation, he insisted that he’d forgotten it.

It’s unclear what to make of this story. One could conclude that the formative power of these myths, told to these men as children, was part of what led them into the field of artificial intelligence. Or perhaps the whole story is apocryphal, an attempt by the world’s leading scientists to lend their enterprise the gravity of a spiritual quest. Both Sussman and Moses went on to become professors at MIT. Mitchell P. Marcus, a computer scientist who studied under Sussman in the 1980s, relayed essentially the same anecdote in an essay and claimed that Sussman had once said, “You know, we computer scientists are really the Kabbalists of today. We animate these inanimate machines by getting strings of symbols just right.” Mitchell saw himself following in this tradition. “As a computer scientist, I see the informational all around me, and I see the informational as very separate from the physical,” he writes. He notes that the mystical strands of Judaism affirm the underlying structure of computer science: “Creating and animating by the manipulation of symbols, which is what computer scientists both do and study, is but one aspect of our being created in God’s image.”

* * *

“There are two types of creation myths,” writes the technology historian George Dyson in his book Turing’s Cathedral, “those where life arises out of the mud, and those where life falls from the sky.” The history of modern computing, Dyson argues, draws on both of these traditions: “Computers arose from the mud, and code fell from the sky.” This dualism, which has fueled some of the most ambitious technological endeavors, is evident in the efforts to summon emergent intelligence from machines. Just as the golems were sculpted out of mud and animated with a magical incantation, so the hope persists that robots built from material parts will become inhabited by that divine breath—the abstract mathematical patterns that make up so much of our world and have the power to make systems come to life. While these mystical overtones should not discredit emergence as such—it is a useful enough way to describe complex systems like beehives and climates—the notion that consciousness can emerge from machines does seem to be a form of wishful thinking, if only because digital technologies were built on the assumption that consciousness played no role in the process of intelligence. Just as it is somewhat fanciful to believe that science can explain consciousness when modern science itself was founded on the exclusion of the mind, it is difficult to believe that technologies designed specifically to elide the notion of the conscious subject could possibly come to develop an interior life.

In fact, to dismiss emergentism as sheer magic is to ignore the specific ways in which it differs from this folklore—even as it superficially satisfies the same desire. Scratch beneath the mystical surface and it becomes clear that emergentism is often not so different from the most reductive forms of materialism, particularly when it comes to the question of human consciousness. Plant intelligence has been called a form of “mindless mastery,” and most emergentists view humans as similarly mindless. We are not rational agents but an encasement of competing systems that lack any sort of unity or agency. Minsky once described the mind as “a sort of tangled-up bureaucracy” whose parts remain ignorant of one another. He described the act of deciding to take a sip of tea in the following terms: “Your GRASPING agents want to keep hold of the cup. Your BALANCING agents want to keep the tea from spilling out. Your THIRST agents want you to drink the tea. Your MOVING agents want to get the cup to your lips.” Just as the intelligence of a beehive or a traffic jam resides in the patterns of these inert, intersecting parts, so human consciousness is merely the abstract relationships that emerge out of these systems: once you get to the lowest level of intelligence, you inevitably find, as Minsky put it, agents that “cannot think at all.” There is no place in this model for what we typically think of as interior experience, or the self. As the science historian Jessica Riskin has argued, emergent theories of mind end up dismissing the very thing they are supposed to explain. “Arriving…at the level of these dumb, foundational agents, one will have lost all sense of intelligence as a feature of mind.”

Even Brooks, with his numinous ambitions of bringing robots to life, referred to consciousness as a “cheap trick,” an illusion that exists only in the eye of the beholder. “It is very easy,” he wrote of one of his insect robots, “for an observer of a system to attribute more complex internal structure than really exists. Herbert appeared to be doing things like path planning and map building, even though it was not.” Even the autonomy that Cog sometimes displayed could be called agency only because a human observer was willing to see it as such. It was no different when it came to human beings, whose consciousness resided solely in their observable actions in the world. In the end he, like Turing, was trying not to build machines with minds or souls but rather to prove that nothing of the sort was needed for a machine to behave in a way that was convincingly human.

Artificial intelligence and plant sentience have both been criticized for anthropomorphism, but this objection misunderstands the flow of the metaphor. Proponents of decentralized intelligence are less interested in projecting human qualities onto nonhuman objects than they are in reconfiguring human intelligence through the lens of these inanimate systems. Just as Brooks claimed that we “overanthropomorphize humans…who are after all mere machines,” so advocates of plant consciousness have insisted that their goal is to move past the notion that human subjectivity is somehow special. The ecologist Monica Gagliano, who has become famous for her experiments on plant “behavior,” notes that while her critics routinely criticize her for anthropomorphizing plants, her intention is precisely the opposite. “I’m interested in phytomorphising the human,” she writes. “I want humans to become more like plants.”

Such aspirations necessarily require expanding the definitions of terms that are usually understood more narrowly. If “intelligence” means abstract thought, then it would be foolish to think that plants are engaging in it. But if it means merely the ability to solve problems or adapt to a particular environment, then it’s difficult to say that plants are not capable of intelligence. If “consciousness” denotes self-awareness in the strongest sense of the word, then nobody would claim that machines have this capacity. But if consciousness is simply awareness of one’s environment, or—as has long been the case in artificial intelligence—the ability to behave in ways that appear deliberate and intentional, then it becomes more difficult to insist on it as a phenomenon that is unique to humans and other animals. While these redefinitions are meant to be more expansive and inclusive, they radically change how we understand these qualities when they are applied to ourselves. This is a risky ontological bargain, one that assumes that if we wish to see ourselves as one with the natural world, we must reduce our understanding of our humanity to such a rudimentary caricature—the exchange of information—that it can be applied to virtually anything.

* * *

In the end Brooks’s hopes for his machines turned out to be overly optimistic. Despite a handful of emergent behaviors, Cog never evolved the more sophisticated capacities his creator had anticipated. The robot remained unable to choose between activities —turning to look at a face or grabbing an object—and often acted in ways that appeared befuddled or confused. Brooks confessed at one point that the robot lacked “coherence,” a conclusion that is unsurprising, given that it was designed from the outset without a unified central control. Even the most advanced robots at MIT were so rife with glitches, so prone to fail at basic tasks, that a 2007 New York Times article claimed that they were “less like thinking, autonomous creatures than they are like fancy puppets that frequently break down.”

Despite Breazeal’s best efforts, Kismet never learned to speak. In 2001, Brooks claimed that the robot was able to say some English words it had learned through the natural process of language acquisition. But the same year, when the technology critic Sherry Turkle took a group of children to the MIT lab, Kismet failed to communicate with them. The kids introduced themselves to the robot, Turkle recalled, and asked it questions. They gave it hugs and kisses, showed it rattles and other toys. The robot made eye contact with them and babbled its nonsense words but was never able to answer their questions or repeat the words they tried to teach it.

Brooks eventually came to question the aptness of the computational metaphor on which he’d based his theories. He acknowledged that throughout history people had compared consciousness to many other technological artifacts: clocks, mills, looms. It was unlikely, he granted, that computing was the final word. But he never lost faith in the promise of technological analogies. “It seems unlikely that we have gotten the metaphor right yet,” he wrote. “But we need to figure out the metaphor.”

Some twenty years later, Brooks’s approach to embodied artificial intelligence is still being pursued in laboratories. One of his former graduate students, Giorgio Metta, of the Italian Institute of Technology, helped build iCub, a humanoid robot that is designed to simulate the cognitive capacities of a three-year-old child. Like Cog and Kismet, iCub is equipped with a host of sensors and cameras that endow the robot with sensory functions and motor skills, and iCub has acquired a number of abilities—such as crawling on all fours, walking, grasping objects, and directing its gaze—simply by interacting with its environment. The theory, again, is that these sensorimotor capacities will eventually lead to more advanced cognitive skills, such as a sense of self or the ability to use language, though so far this has not happened.

Outside the lab, most commercial AI systems today are designed not to achieve artificial general intelligence (intelligence, in other words, that includes all the abilities and competencies of humans) but to perform more narrow and specific tasks: delivering food on college campuses, driving cars, auditing loan applications, cleaning up spills at grocery stores. Many of these systems are still outfitted with human qualities, like the campus robots that greet their customers in recorded voices or the home assistants—Alexa, Siri—that speak to us out of the void in female voices. Despite the fact that these robots often appear convincingly human, they rely on incomprehensibly complex algorithms—neural networks, deep learning—that process information in a way that is very unlike human intelligence. Their ability to tell jokes or make ironic quips in response to our questions is not evidence of self-awareness but rather the result of clever programming. Daniel Dennett has noted that over the last decade or so, in lieu of building truly humanlike robots, AI creators have outfitted their machines “with cutesy humanoid touches, Disneyfication effects that will enchant and disarm the uninitiated.”

Dennett argues that the primary danger is not that these social robots will suddenly overtake us in intelligence and turn malevolent, as was once believed, but rather that we will be fooled into prematurely granting them the distinction of human consciousness. The ability to deny these machines humanity, he argues, is particularly difficult to cultivate, as contemporary politics so often cautions us against anthropocentrism. “Indeed, the capacity to resist the allure of treating an apparent person as a person is an ugly talent, reeking of racism or species-ism,” he writes. “Many people would find the cultivation of such a ruthlessly skeptical approach morally repugnant, and we can anticipate that even the most proficient system users would occasionally succumb to the temptation to ‘befriend’ their tools, if only to assuage their discomfort with the execution of their duties.” What we need, he argues, is tools —not colleagues or friends. And yet technology companies learned long ago that their products are far more appealing—and more profitable—when humans manage to bond with them.

As robots increasingly come to replace humans in retail and food services, these humanoid touches begin to seem especially sinister. Walmart, one of the companies that recently began using robots in its stores, is already implementing training programs to help their employees transition into other sectors, knowing that the number of retail positions will soon decline as machines take over. This process is gradual by design, in an effort to forestall political dissent. Peter Hancock, a history of automation professor at the University of Central Florida, points out that these companies are well aware of the potential of automation to provoke protest. “If you push too hard, too far, people transfer their anger to the technology and they revolt,” he told the New York Times in 2020. It’s important that the transition happen in phases, with robots working alongside humans. And it’s especially important that the robots who are eliminating those jobs appear likable and unthreatening. “It’s like Mary Poppins,” Hancock says. “A spoonful of sugar makes the robots go down.”
