---
book: "God, Human, Animal, Machine"
author: "Meghan O'Gieblyn"
part: "Paradox"
chapter: 8
source_pages: "133-150"
type: source
---

# Chapter 8 — Paradox

In 2003 the philosopher Nick Bostrom published a paper in Philosophical Quarterly titled “Are You Living in a Computer Simulation?” Bostrom is a professor at Oxford University and the founder of the Future of Humanity Institute, an interdisciplinary research center dedicated to investigating existential risk and other big-picture questions about the fate of our species. Much of his research and writing has focused on the threat of superintelligence—AI that is astronomically smarter and more powerful than humans—and the thesis of his article, which is now known as the simulation hypothesis, was an outgrowth (albeit a somewhat tangential one) of this concern. Bostrom, a prominent transhumanist, believes that humanity is in the process of becoming posthuman as we merge our bodies with technology. We are becoming superintelligence ourselves. His simulation hypothesis begins by imagining a future, many generations from now, when posthumans have achieved an almost godlike mastery over the world. One of the things these posthumans might do, Bostrom proposes, is create simulations—digital environments that contain entire worlds. We already make simulated worlds in video games and in interfaces like Second Life and the Sims, though in the future increased computing power will enable these simulations to become far more complex, and the beings who live inside them will likely be conscious and self-aware. (Like Kurzweil, he glosses over the many technical hurdles in artificial intelligence by insisting that so long as it’s possible in theory that minds can be enacted on silicon processors, and so long as future technologies are sufficiently complex, these technologies will be conscious.) These inhabitants will not know that they are living in a simulation but will believe their world is all that exists. It’s likely, Bostrom argues, that at least some of these simulations will be historical, re-creating the conditions of earlier civilizations that have since collapsed, which would be useful for educational purposes, or for sheer entertainment. Perhaps posthuman schoolchildren will observe simulated re-creations of the twenty-first century in order to learn about their ancestors’ way of life. Or perhaps posthuman couples will watch life unfolding in these virtual landscapes the way we now enjoy reality TV shows. The question that Bostrom asks us to entertain is, how do we know that we are living in the real twentyfirst century—a historical time that is currently unfolding—and not in one of these simulations of the past? “It could be the case,” he writes, “that the vast majority of minds like ours do not belong to the original race but rather to people simulated by the advanced descendants of an original race.”

Bostrom calls upon statistical probabilities to flesh out this argument. Assuming that there will be many generations of posthumans—a series of rising and falling civilizations—who create these computerized environments, there will be many, many simulations in the future and only one “basement-level” reality, which means it is far more likely than not that we are currently living in one of these simulated worlds. There are, Bostrom acknowledges, some reasons that this might not be the case. Perhaps the human species will go extinct before we manage to reach the posthuman stage and harness the technological power needed to create sophisticated simulations. Or perhaps we will gain this capacity but then decide, for any number of reasons—ethical concerns, simple lack of interest —not to create them. But if neither of these possibilities holds true, then we are almost certainly living in a simulation.

While the article received some buzz upon publication, the theory’s popularity has escalated over the past decade or so. It has gained an especially fervent following among scientists and Silicon Valley luminaries, including Neil deGrasse Tyson and Elon Musk, who have come out as proponents. (Musk has said he believes the odds that we are not living in a computer simulation is “one in billions”). A few years ago, a New Yorker profile of the venture capitalist Sam Altman reported that two unnamed billionaires are currently funding scientists to figure out how to break us out of the simulation. It has become, in other words, the twenty-first century’s favored variation on Descartes’s skeptical thought experiment—the proposition that our minds are lying to us, that the world is radically other than it seems.

Bostrom’s hypothesis was the subject of my presentation in Sweden, which I gave on the second day of the conference, standing at the edge of an empty stage in the main venue’s darkened theater. Despite my familiarity with the theory, these ideas sounded disconcertedly harebrained when spoken aloud, and I was suddenly grateful for the blinding stage lights, which prevented me from seeing the faces in the crowd. The point of my presentation was that for all its supposed “naturalism,” the simulation hypothesis was ultimately an argument from design. It belonged to a long lineage of creationist rhetoric that invoked human technologies to argue that the universe could not have come about without the conscious intention of a designer.

The argument from design, at least in its modern form, was itself an outgrowth of the mechanistic philosophy of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Before that, medieval philosophers were still working under the assumptions of Aristotle’s teleology—the notion that the world was animated with an intrinsic sense of agency that caused all things to act toward their final end. A rock fell to the ground because it was the telos of the rock to seek the earth. Plants grew toward the light because it was the telos of plants to seek sunlight. It was this enchanted cosmology that Descartes and other philosophers overturned when they envisioned the world as a passive mechanism—a philosophy that eventually solidified into Newtonian physics, with its clockworklike rules of cause and effect. It was, ironically, this disenchanted cosmology—with its order, its patterns, its predictability—that led eighteenth-century Christian philosophers like William Paley and Robert Boyle to argue that such a world could not function without a divine Engineer. Unlike the medieval theologians, who envisioned God as inextricably bound up with creation, infusing it with meaning and purpose, these modern religious philosophers saw God as separate from his creation the way a clockmaker is distinct from his clock. As the historian Jessica Riskin notes in her book The Restless Clock, these thinkers essentially evacuated meaning and purpose from the world itself and relegated it to a distant and supernatural God. Just as the purpose of a clock is not intrinsic to the clock itself, but only makes sense to the clockmaker, so the most reductive, mechanistic scientific accounts relied, ironically, on appeals to a supernatural power. Riskin calls this iteration of the design argument “theological mechanism.” It was a worldview that “relied upon a divine Designer to whom it outsourced perception, will, and purposeful action.”

While Bostrom’s argument did not explicitly make this case, the notion that the universe was an enormous computer responded to the same modern problem. If the world were truly random and accidental, without any intrinsic purpose, agency, or telos, then why were our physical laws fine-tuned with such precision? How did nature come to display what the physicist Paul Davies once called “a fiendishly clever bit of trickery: meaninglessness and absurdity somehow masquerading as ingenious order and rationality”? If the cosmos was in fact an enormous computer that was intentionally designed, these regularities suddenly made sense—they were programmed into the software, part of the digital fabric of our world. Bostrom acknowledged in his paper that there were “some loose analogies” that could be drawn between the simulation hypothesis and traditional religious concepts. The programmers who created the simulation would be like gods compared to those of us within the simulation. They could be described, from our vantage point, as omnipotent (capable of interfering with the simulation’s fundamental rules and laws) and omniscient (able to monitor everything that happens within it). It’s possible that the programmers could “resurrect” individual people from the simulation and bring them back to life in another one—analogous to reincarnation or an afterlife—and they could presumably even reward or punish us based on our actions. Thinking deeply about this system, Bostrom argued, could likely produce its own brand of naturalistic theology.

More than a few philosophers had taken him up on this. Toward the end of my presentation, I noted that there was a weird cache of “simulation theology” available online—academic papers written by fans of the hypothesis that proposed entire moral and ethical systems based on Bostrom’s proposition. Eric Steinhart, a “digitalist” philosopher, wrote his own simulation theodicy (traditionally, an argument for God’s benevolence despite the existence of evil). His “Argument for Virtuous Engineers” claims that it is reasonable to assume our creators are benevolent because the ability to build sophisticated technologies requires “long-term stability” and “rational purposefulness.” These qualities cannot be cultivated without social harmony, and social harmony can be achieved only by virtuous beings. Other works of simulation theology propose how individuals should live in order to maximize their chances of resurrection. Try to be as interesting as possible, one argues. Stay close to famous people, or become a celebrity yourself. The more fascinating and unique you manage to be, the more inclined the programmers will be to hang on to your software and resurrect it.

At one point in the presentation, I offered a beat of personal narrative. I’d grown up in a fundamentalist family, I said, that believed in creationism. Whereas many Christians read the Genesis narrative as a literary metaphor for the origins of the universe, we took scripture literally, word for word, insisting that God had in fact created the world in seven twenty-four-hour days. Metaphors are obviously central to religious texts, I said, and also to science. We see similarities between our creations and the natural world, and so we say that the mind is like a computer or that the entire universe is analogous to an information processor. But we run into trouble when we forget that these are metaphors and take them at face value—when we insist, for example, that because there are similarities between physics and information technologies, the universe is in fact an enormous computer. This brand of scientific fundamentalism can lead, ironically, back to the premises of religion.

During the Q&A, one audience member pressed me on this point. It was clear that I’d rejected Christianity as a metaphor, he said. And I had pointed out the dangers of scientific metaphors as well. But metaphors were unavoidable for us as humans. They were fundamental to language, to reason—did I not agree?

I did, I said.

In which case, he said, what alternative did I recommend? Or—if he could put the question more personally—what metaphor did I myself subscribe to today?

The auditorium lights were back on by that point, but my eyes had not yet adjusted and I could not make out the man’s face in the crowd. Clearly he had misunderstood my point, which was not that we should reject all metaphors, only that we should recognize them for what they are: crude attempts to elucidate concepts that are still beyond our understanding. In the end I made some semblance of this point, then said something bland and unconvincing about how I’d very much like to see a larger conversation about new metaphors taking place in these fields. As I left the stage, I had already begun mentally revising my answer.

* * *

Over the following days of the conference, I continued to experience echoes, strange coincidences, like the one that led me to the cemetery where Bohr and Kierkegaard were buried. I would read something in one of the books I’d brought with me—a new theory, a thinker whose name I’d never encountered—and then someone at the conference would mention the same name or the same idea only hours later. I could not help feeling that such coincidences were imbued with meaning—signs from the universe—though I knew this was unlikely, particularly when considered from a statistical standpoint. (How many words, images, and names did I encounter in a given day? It never occurred to me to consider all the ones that were not repeated.) Our brains have evolved to detect patterns and attribute significance to events that are entirely random, imagining signal where there is mostly noise. This tendency is probably hypertrophied in writers, who are constantly seeing the world in terms of narrative. In fact, for a while, encountering this very sentiment in books became yet another doubling in my life. “When I am absorbed in writing a novel, reality starts twisting to reflect and inform everything I’ve been thinking about in my work,” Ottessa Moshfegh notes in an essay. Virginia Woolf, writing in her diary in 1933, expressed essentially the same thing: “What an odd coincidence! that real life should provide precisely the situation I am writing about!” The novelist Kate Zambreno claims that when she is working, she often sees the same names and the same books everywhere: “I begin to make connections with everything—I see literature everywhere, a vast referentiality.”

Of course, this “vast referentiality” is in other contexts a sign of madness. In her biography of the mathematician John Nash, A Beautiful Mind, Sylvia Nasar writes that Nash’s “longstanding conviction that the world was rational,” which had led him to study mathematics, slid almost imperceptibly into schizophrenia, wherein he began finding hidden messages in the New York Times and deep cosmic significance in the number of red neckties he spotted on the MIT campus. His desire to find the underlying structure of the world through geometry and mathematics evolved, Nasar observes, “into a caricature of itself, turning into an unshakable belief that everything had meaning, everything had a reason, nothing was random or coincidental.”

It was difficult to avoid attributing the reappearance of these patterns in my life—and the temptation to believe they were signs—to the fact that I’d returned to these cosmological questions I’d long ago vowed to avoid. Revisiting Bostrom’s theory for the presentation had reopened a number of questions I’d never fully resolved, and they came to me, unbidden, during the panels I attended and on my walks to and from the hotel. Since I’d first encountered the simulation hypothesis a decade earlier, the notion that the universe was informational had gained more mainstream clout. I had never found the idea of the informational universe very convincing, but it occurred to me now that Bostrom’s hypothesis could, at least in theory, explain some of the gaps.

One of the common objections to the informational universe is that information cannot be “ungrounded,” without a material instantiation. Claude Shannon, the father of information theory, insisted that information had to exist in some kind of physical medium, like computer hardware. But as information has become increasingly decontextualized over the years, extended to explain an ever-widening variety of phenomenon, it is often taken to be freefloating and immaterial. In fact, the definition of information has become so expansive and confused that there no longer exists a clear consensus on what information actually is. The Oxford philosopher Luciano Floridi has argued that information is “an elusive concept” and “notoriously a polymorphic phenomenon” that can be associated with several different explanations, depending on the level of abstraction. The imprecision of the concept has contributed, no doubt, to its attractiveness as a metaphor, though this expansiveness ultimately makes the word meaningless. As the philosopher Bernardo Kastrup has pointed out, “To say that information exists in and of itself is akin to speaking of spin without the top, of ripples without water, of a dance without the dancer, or of the Cheshire Cat’s grin without the cat.”

But if the universe were an enormous computer, then this information would in fact be instantiated on something material, akin to a hard drive. We wouldn’t be able to see or detect it because it would exist in the universe of the programmers who built it. All we would notice was its higher-level structure, the abstract patterns and laws that were part of its software. The simulation hypothesis, in other words, could explain why our universe is imbued with discernible patterns and mathematical regularities while also explaining how those patterns could be rooted in something more than mere abstractions. Perhaps Galileo was not so far off when he imagined the universe as a book written by God in the language of mathematics. The universe was software written by programmers in the binary language of code.

The hypothesis also offered a compelling explanation for the measurement problem, based on the analogies drawn from video games and virtual reality, where objects are generated only as needed, when the player interacts with them. In fact, when putting together my presentation, I’d come across a NASA scientist, Rich Terrile, who argued this precise point. “Scientists have bent over backwards to eliminate the idea that we need a conscious observer,” he said in an interview with the Guardian. “Maybe the real solution is you do need a conscious entity like a conscious player of a video game.” The more I pieced together these ideas, the more persuasive they began to seem. Apparently some part of me still longed to return to the pre-Copernican worldview in which I was raised—the universe in which humans were the pinnacle of creation, handcrafted and watched over by a benevolent Creator. Perhaps the larger appeal of Bostrom’s argument was that it was anthropocentric. It allowed us to believe once again that we were at the center of things, and that our lives had purpose and meaning in the larger scheme of the universe. This was essentially the point made by the Harvard theoretical physicist Lisa Randall when asked whether Bostrom’s theory was viable. It requires, she said, “a lot of hubris to think we would be what ended up being simulated.”

Of course, if you took the theory to its logical end, this conclusion didn’t really hold up. Bostrom had argued that it was highly unlikely that ours was the only simulated universe. Any civilization advanced enough to create microcosms of this sort would likely create millions of them, each with slight variations. It was even possible that the simulated universes, as their civilizations and technologies advanced, would start creating their own simulated worlds, such that there could be an infinite regress of worlds stacked within worlds, like Russian nesting dolls. What this vision of the cosmos suggested, more than anything, was the multiverse theory. Our universe was just one of many possible worlds, each of which probably had its own set of physical laws, instantiating every possible permutation of reality.

The irony, of course—one that took me longer than it should have to realize when I first encountered the theory—was that if you took Bostrom’s thesis to its conclusion, it didn’t really explain anything about the universe or its origins. Presumably there was still some original basement-level reality at its foundation—there could be no true infinite regress—occupied by first posthumans who created the very first technological simulation. But these posthumans were just our descendants—or the descendants of some other species that had evolved on another planet—and so the question about origins remained unchanged, only pushed back one degree. Where did the universe originally come from?

* * *

Days after my presentation I was still bothered by the question I’d failed to answer during the Q&A about what metaphor I subscribed to. It returned to me again on the day I flew home, as I stood in the sunny atriums of international airports, moving through seemingly endless lines for security and passport control. If I had answered honestly, I would have said that I no longer believed in metaphors. All of them, religious or scientific, were treacherous, sullied by human longings. Also, it was not my job as a critic to espouse a particular position or provide a solution. This was what bothered me so much about the question, I realized. The man was turning the focus back on me and my beliefs, which were obviously not the point of my talk. I had offered the personal anecdote about my religious background only as a way to shore up my authority on the subject. The same thing had happened in countless other interviews and talks. As soon as I opened a small aperture into my life, people became less interested in the ideas I was discussing than in my personal story and my perspective as someone who was formerly religious.

This was of course a stupid complaint. I am a personal writer, though it’s an identity I’ve always felt conflicted about. Personal essays are often dismissed as unserious or egotistical, a criticism of which I am reminded each time my finger catches on the “I,” the only letter that has come loose from my computer keyboard, presumably from overuse. In the past I’d resolved more than once to write straight journalism or criticism, “objective” forms that require no personal angle. But each time I tried, something odd happened. At some point in the writing process I got stuck; I could not get the ideas to come together or the argument to take form—or rather, the argument kept changing. When writing in this divested way, in the realm of pure and unmediated ideas, anything is possible, and the possibilities overwhelmed me. I became too conscious of the words themselves and the fact that I could manipulate them endlessly, the way numbers can be manipulated apart from any concrete referent. I suppose I came to see language the way that machines regard information, as a purely formal structure of symbols without meaning. In each instance the only way out of the impasse was to put the “I” back into the story. As soon as I began binding the ideas to myself and my lived experience, it became possible again to create cogent arguments. The words became conduits for meaning instead of empty vessels that were themselves the whole show.

I realized that this problem was idiosyncratic. Certainly other people managed to write prolifically in these objective genres without the same trouble. But I could not help feeling that this experience contained a larger truth. For me, the “I” was not an expression of hubris but a necessary limitation. It was a way to narrow my frame of reference and acknowledge that I was speaking from a particular location, from that modest and grounded place we call “point of view.”

Perhaps—if I can hazard a metaphor myself—this was not unlike what Bohr was trying to communicate when he observed that humans are incapable of understanding the world beyond “our necessarily prejudiced conceptual frame.” And perhaps it can explain why the multiverse theory and other attempts to transcend our anthropocentric outlook so often strike me as a form of bad faith, guilty of the very hubris they claim to reject. There is no Archimedean point, no purely objective vista that allows us to transcend our human interests and see the world from above, as we once imagined it appeared to God. It is our distinctive vantage that binds us to the world and sets the necessary limitations that are required to make sense of it. This is true, of course, regardless of which interpretation of physics is ultimately correct. It was Max Planck, the physicist who struggled more than any other pioneer of quantum theory to accept the loss of a purely objective worldview, who acknowledged that the central problems of physics have always been reflexive. “Science cannot solve the ultimate mystery of nature,” he wrote in 1932. “And that is because, in the last analysis, we ourselves are part of nature and therefore part of the mystery that we are trying to solve.”

* * *

I first encountered Bostrom’s simulation hypothesis ten years ago, at the end of a humid and deliriously long Chicago summer. The heat was so unbearable most days that the streets of my neighborhood remained empty until sunset, when people brought lawn chairs out to the sidewalk and children pried the caps off fire hydrants to flood the streets. On the days I did not work, I sat with my laptop on the floor of my apartment, directly below the window AC unit, surfing the threads of transhumanist message boards, which is where I first found Bostrom’s paper. His argument did not strike me as terribly persuasive. The technological premises that supported it—Moore’s Law, posthumanism—were still hazy to me, and the theory seemed inspired less by statistical rigor than science fiction or French theory.

The most disquieting ideas rarely present themselves as immediately convincing. The theory instead insinuated itself in a roundabout manner, winding its way into my consciousness from behind. It presented itself, in other words, as a thought experiment. I had devoted several years of my life to studying a system of thought that had virtually no bearing on the modern world, and the theory became an excuse for me to exercise the many axioms and theodicies that I had no reason to revisit in everyday life, something to occupy my mind during the hours I wiped down the bar rails at work or waited for the afternoon bus. Bostrom’s own religious speculations had been rather sloppy—he clearly wasn’t a theologian. He’d said that the programmers were omniscient and omnipotent, but logically they would be more like the limited God of process theology, able to influence the world and create possibilities but incapable of determining the entire system. A watchmaker knew everything about the watch that he made, but computers were far more complex. There were bugs that eluded even their designers, algorithms so complex they remained black boxes to the people who built them. Perhaps this could explain the existence of evil: sin and suffering were simply errors in the code that could not be corrected without significantly disrupting the system. This led me to wonder whether the programmers were immanent or transcendent. If they were watching us at all times, did they ever attempt to communicate with us—perhaps through signs or symbols—and could we decipher their intentions if we paid close attention to the patterns? Did they ever disrupt the system’s laws to create “miraculous” events? Fans of the theory had proposed that the programmers could enter into the simulation by adopting digital avatars, which meant that anyone might actually be a Creator descended from this other world. It was this idea in particular that turned my thoughts in a grim direction. What was the incarnation but an allegory about God entering the simulation through his human avatar, Christ? Perhaps world religion was merely a game invented by the programmers, a competition by which each posthuman sent down her own prophet-avatar and wagered on which one would gain the most converts.

And what about resurrection? I was already immersed in transhumanist predictions about the afterlife, but the simulation made everything more complicated. If there were worlds within worlds, it was possible we would awaken in what we believed to be “reality” when in truth we were in another simulation. Descartes, when considering the possibility that he was dreaming, had been troubled by the notion of “false awakenings,” the phenomenon in which you dream that you are waking into ordinary life when in fact you are still asleep. Perhaps the afterlife would not be the Christian culmination of history—the veil lifting from our eyes, the metaphor resolving into truth—but something more like reincarnation, one false awakening after another, until we reached enlightenment.

I doubt these questions would have taken hold with such force if I were not already confused about the findings of contemporary physics. Whenever I read about the improbable values of physical constants, the exact precision of gravity and electromagnetism, I could think only of how much I would have valued such evidence of fine-tuning as a believer. Could there be any stronger corroboration for intelligent design? I suppose some part of me, even then, had not completely bought into the physicalism I claimed to espouse. Despite devoting myself to a rigorously atheistic canon, reading and rereading Dawkins and Dennett and Sam Harris with the same reverence I’d once reserved for the Church fathers, I still harbored somewhere in my lizard brain a secret fundamental doubt that the world could have come about by chance.

It was around this time that I got into an argument with my mother during a visit home. Still convinced that she could win me back to the faith through reason and apologetics, she relayed to me a hypothetical scenario that she’d read somewhere, or maybe heard on Christian radio. Imagine that you have a box of alphabet cereal, she said, and poured it out one morning, and the letters just happened to fall out in a pattern that spelled “Hello Meghan.” Would you be able to dismiss this as an accident?

It was a crude example, and I was almost embarrassed to have to set her right. Illustrations like these, I said, failed to understand the power of probabilities. If an infinite number of boxes of alphabet cereal were poured out over the course of an infinite number of mornings, at some point the cereal would spell out those words.

At this she laughed out loud. “You can’t honestly believe that,” she said.

I replied that it was a matter not of belief but of a proper understanding of statistical mechanics. And yet even as I said this, something in me silently revolted, some voice that insisted no, the boxes would never spell out a cogent sentence, no matter how many times they were overturned, just as an infinite number of chimpanzees pounding away on an infinite number of typewriters would never manage to produce Hamlet—that intelligent order of that magnitude required something else: consciousness, intention.

At some point that fall, the boundary between these cosmological questions and my personal life began to blur. The abstract scientific problems that I could not explain—order, regularity, coincidence—began to appear in my life in the form of patterns and doubling, those discordant moments that people who came of age around the turn of the millennium tend to dismiss as “a glitch in the Matrix.” I’d run into the same stranger twice in a single day, or find myself seated across from someone on the train whom I’d been seated across from on a different train only hours before. If you took public transit each day, as I did, such things were bound to happen, but they were happening more often than seemed plausible. One afternoon, as I was walking to the bus stop along my usual route, I looked up and saw on the opposite side of the street a church I had never noticed before. Or that had not been there before. I’d walked the same street every day for at least a year; it was impossible that I had only now taken notice of it. As I crossed the street, I realized that it was not in fact a church but the façade of a church—just the front wall, which had a bell tower and a small wooden door. The windows were gone, so you could see straight through to the trees behind it. A plaque explained that the building had been destroyed forty years ago in a fire. It was now repurposed as an art space. Behind the façade, where the sanctuary should have been, was a fenced-in garden, above which hung, from wire, a crucifix made of machine parts.

It might be relevant here to point out that I was existing during those years in a version of reality that was already heavily mediated. My drinking had evolved from escapism to dependence, and factoring in the multitude of pills I took each day to manage withdrawal, there were diminishingly few hours that I was truly sober. My life began to take on the sharp and irregular plotline of a Kafka novel, an endless series of non sequiturs and suspicious similarities that I was left to interpret, and my interpretations became increasingly delusional and solipsistic, fixated on “glitches” and recurrences and the conviction that certain people in my life were not conscious beings but what is known in gaming terminology as NPCs, or non-player characters. I adopted a different route to the bus stop, going well out of my way to avoid the church and the mechanical Christ. Eventually the paranoia became so bad that I stopped leaving my apartment except to go to work. Then I stopped going to work.

For a number of reasons, all of them entangled and complex, I’ve often thought back on this period with uneasiness. I have a family history of mental illness, for one, and was at that time approaching the average age of onset. But given how aberrant this experience was, I’ve come to favor a different conclusion. It is well established that chronic substance abuse can lead to cognitive lapses that are symptomatically       indistinguishable      from     psychosis.    The neurophysiological effects of alcoholism—depressed nerve centers, thiamine depletion—are the same conditions one finds in the brains of psychiatric patients. To put it more bluntly, paranoia, obsessions, and hallucinations are simply the endpoint of treating your body as a kind of deranged chemistry experiment. The most persuasive evidence for this theory is that the end of my delusive thinking was more or less coterminous with the end of my drinking. Later that year I underwent inpatient treatment for addiction, after which I cut out drinking and drugs entirely, and my mind quickly regained equilibrium.

It is a reductive explanation, highly uncharacteristic of the narratives I typically invent about my life, and there have been moments over the years when I’ve doubted its airtight logic. I want to say that theories like Bostrom’s are intrinsically untethering—so much so that even now I cannot consider them in any serious way without beginning to question the very foundations of reality. But the endpoint of this logic—that it’s possible to think oneself into insanity —would seem to fly in the face of modern psychiatry, and perhaps physicalism itself, which insists that the full range of human behavior is reducible to chemical imbalances and misfiring synapses. Is it naive to grant the mind such power over the body? Is it only in Russian novels that a person is driven to madness after encountering some new philosophy? Why is the only plausible explanation for an obsession the imbalance of neurotransmitters or depressed nerve centers—why could I not have been driven to the same ends by an idea?
