---
book: "God, Human, Animal, Machine"
author: "Meghan O'Gieblyn"
part: "Metonymy"
chapter: 9
source_pages: "152-166"
type: source
---

# Chapter 9 — Metonymy

You exit the simulation and find yourself in another simulation. You wake from sleep and start the day not realizing you are in yet another dream. False awakenings are a real phenomenon, but they can also serve as metaphor, a reminder of how easily we are deceived into believing that a dream has ended. Given how frequently, how incorrigibly, scientific and technological narratives circle back to religious myth, it is tempting to conclude that the Enlightenment was itself a false awakening, an attempt to convince ourselves we’d left behind the dream of the enchanted world when we have remained captive to its oneiric visions. One popular explanation for these regressions is psychological. Reenchantment is a form of wishful thinking, a weakness that persists among those who are unable to swallow the bitter truths of materialism. This is what Weber suggested when he predicted that the meaninglessness of a disenchanted world would create a society “racked by endless searches for absolute experience and spiritual wholeness.”

An alternate conclusion is that the persistence reveals something logically unsatisfying, or perhaps fundamentally implausible, about our disenchanted worldview—a sign that there is instability at the very core of scientific materialism. The modern era Descartes inaugurated was, after all, not based on any empirical evidence. No one ever proved that the mind was not part of the world or that the universe was entirely passive and mechanistic. Modern materialism was a philosophical project, a thought experiment dreamed up in an armchair by the fire. And while this philosophy has proved wildly successful in predicting and describing the behavior of the physical world, its inability to explain consciousness and the intrinsic nature of matter has led some contemporary thinkers to revisit the alternative philosophies that were from the beginning in contention with it.

One of the early critics of Descartes’s philosophy was Anne Conway, a seventeenth-century English viscountess who wrote a treatise on the mind-body problem. Conway was tutored from a young age by the philosopher Henry More, who introduced her to Descartes, Hobbes, and Spinoza. She found all of their conclusions unsatisfying. Dualism was implausible because it failed to explain how the immaterial spirit interacted with the physical body (a point which another woman, Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia, pointed out to Descartes directly, in her correspondence with him). Because of this problem, she realized, Descartes’s philosophy led inexorably back to pure mechanism. If the soul is truly immaterial and not integral to the body, then it becomes superfluous. One ended up with pure Hobbesian materialism, which Conway found equally unconvincing, as it failed to account for any kind of inner life. How could the living body be made of dead matter?

Conway’s treatise, The Principles of the Most Ancient and Modern Philosophy, proposed a different metaphysics. There was only a single substance in the world, she argued, and this substance was a mix of spirit and matter. All things, from rocks to trees to animals to humans, contained this mixed substance, which meant that all things were ensouled. There was no substantial difference between a rock and a human being, nor the body and the mind—as she put it, “Spirit and body are one.” Conway’s ontology was implicitly theological. Her ideas were heavily influenced by kabbalistic literature and Platonism and often deferred to the language of Christian theology. God, she argued, could not possibly create inanimate matter, because he himself was spirit, and anything that contained no spirit would be cut off from God, “a non-entity or fiction.” Her treatise, the first philosophical paper published by a woman, was one of the first modern articulations of panpsychism, the idea that consciousness is fundamental to the natural world. It was among the literature that inspired Leibniz’s version of panpsychism, which is today more widely known. In his Monadology, he attempted, much like Conway, to solve the mind-body problem by proposing that the world was made up of elementary particles—monads—that were “endowed with perception and appetite.” Everything we called matter was at its most fundamental level conscious.

Panpsychism has surfaced from time to time in the centuries since, most notably in the philosophy of Bertrand Russell and Arthur Eddington, who realized that the two most notable “gaps” in physicalism—the problem of consciousness and the “problem of intrinsic natures” (the question of what matter is)—could be solved in one fell swoop. Physics could not tell us what matter was made out of, and nobody could understand what consciousness was, so maybe consciousness was, in fact, the fundamental nature of all matter. Mental states were the intrinsic nature of physical states. Their ideas lost steam after World War II, as philosophy became more hostile to metaphysics, but over the past couple decades panpsychism has been revisited by notable philosophers such as Galen Strawson, David Chalmers, and Thomas Nagel. The impasse surrounding the hard problem of consciousness and the weirdness of the quantum world has created a new openness to the notion that the mind should have never been excluded from the physical sciences in the first place. As the philosopher Philip Goff, one of the most prominent contemporary panpsychists, has pointed out, our belief that science will solve the mystery of consciousness, given that it has triumphed in so many other arenas, ignores that its success was predicated in the first place on the exclusion of the mind. “The fact that physical science has been extremely successful when it ignores the sensory qualities,” he writes, “gives us no reason to think that it will be similarly successful if and when it turns its attention to the sensory qualities themselves.” We cannot know what matter is intrinsically, Goff argues, but we do know that in at least one case—brain matter—it is accompanied by subjective experience. He believes this is a clue that consciousness is fundamental, or perhaps even ubiquitous, in the natural world, that trees, insects, and plants have some sort of experience. Even subatomic particles might be said to have a very primitive sense of experience and agency, or what Goff calls “inclinations,” which might account for how they act in predictable ways. Centuries of reductive materialism have convinced us that consciousness is some great mystery, but in truth nothing is more familiar to us. “What is mysterious is reality,” he writes, “and our knowledge of consciousness is one of the best clues we have for working out what that mysterious thing is like.”

Some neuroscientists have reached the same conclusion, arriving at panpsychism not through philosophy but via information theory. One of the leading contemporary theories of consciousness—probably the leading one at the time of this writing—is integrated information theory, or IIT. Pioneered by Giulio Tononi and Christof Koch (the neuroscientist who used the free-will argument to justify leaving his wife), IIT holds that consciousness is bound up with the way that information is “integrated” in the brain. Information is considered integrated when it cannot be easily localized but instead relies on highly complex connections across different regions of the brain. The theory attempts to explain why we experience consciousness as seamless—why sounds and smells and sights are processed as a single experience despite the fact that these sensory inputs are coming from different areas. Koch and Tononi believe that the more integrated a system is, the more likely it is to be conscious. They have come up with a specific number, Φ, or phi, which they believe is a threshold and is designed to measure the interdependence of different parts of a system. (Tononi describes phi as “the amount of information generated by a complex of elements, above and beyond the information generated by its parts.”) If a system has a nonzero value of phi, then it is conscious, and the more phi it has, the more conscious it is. The human brain has a very high level of integration, but as Koch notes in his 2019 book The Feeling of Life Itself, ravens, jellyfish, bees, and many other creatures have a nonzero level of phi, which means that they too are conscious—as are atoms, quarks, and some single-celled organisms. Even bacteria, Koch argues, have “a tiny glow of experience.”

One of the main appeals of panpsychism is that it manages to avoid many of the intractable problems of consciousness—both the hard problem of materialism and the interaction problem of dualism. It makes it easier to speculate about how observation, in quantum mechanics, causes the wave function to collapse, given that consciousness is not merely an illusion but a fundamental property of the world that can presumably have causal effects on other objects. It also offers a compelling explanation for a problem physicalists struggle to make sense of: how consciousness somehow arose or emerged from matter during the blind march of evolution. For the panpsychist, it was there from the beginning, in the smallest and earliest particles.

But beyond these technical satisfactions, there is something more primitively—perhaps even spiritually—appealing about the possibility that the mind, or the soul, is central to the universe. Unlike emergentism and other systems theories that cleverly redefine terms like “consciousness” and “cognition” so that they apply to forests and insect colonies, panpsychists believe that these entities truly possess some kind of phenomenal experience—that it feels like something to be a mouse, an amoeba, or a quark. Panpsychism essentially resurrects the Great Chain of Being or the scala naturae of medieval Christianity, which envisioned all of nature—plants, animals, humans, angels, and God himself—existing within a continuum of consciousness, each imbued with lesser or greater degrees of spirit. The leading panpsychists have not shied away from these mystical implications. “Panpsychism,” writes Goff, “offers a way of ‘re-enchanting’ the universe. In the panpsychist view, the universe is like us; we belong in it.” He points out that if consciousness truly is the ultimate nature of reality, it would make religious and spiritual experiences more plausible. In almost all mystical experiences reported cross-culturally, the ordinary distinctions between subject and object dissolve and the mystic experiences some kind of formless consciousness. Goff acknowledges that such experiences may very well be delusions, but they also fall eerily in line with the panpsychic notion that consciousness is the ultimate nature of physical reality. Under panpsychism, he writes, “the yearnings of faith and the rationality of science might finally come into harmony.”

It’s often said that our technological culture has alienated us from nature and estranged us from our inner spirit. It has granted us a false sense of supremacy, allowing us to believe that we exist above and beyond the natural world, to see ourselves as the only living beings in a universe of dead matter. Both Koch and Goff have written passionately about the need to abandon anthropocentrism, and they believe panpsychism offers a way out. “We need not live in the human realm, ever more diluted by globalization and capitalism,” Goff argues. He imagines that we would behave more ethically toward the nonhuman world if we saw ourselves as one with the trees and oceans and glaciers. “Selfish conduct is rooted in the belief that we are wholly separate and distinct individuals,” he writes. Koch ends his book with a similar call to arms. “We must abandon the idea,” he writes, “that humans are at the center of the ethical universe and bestow value on the rest of the natural world only insofar as it suits humanity’s ends.”

* * *

It is probably a sign of the times that I don’t find panpsychism entirely absurd. Although the theory is still a minority position within academia, there is undoubtedly more openness today to theories that upturn modern orthodoxies to extend consciousness down the chain of being. Whenever I mention panpsychism in social settings, someone will inevitably begin speaking enthusiastically about a novel they just read about tree consciousness, or a podcast they heard about mushroom communication networks, or a recent New Yorker article about how psychedelic plants evolved to use “messenger      molecules”      to    communicate        with  human neurotransmitters. Seeing the world as broadly alive is less a novel proposition than a return to the worldview of all early human cultures, a mental schema that is perhaps innate to us. It’s clear that humans are predisposed to believe all things have intelligence and agency, that nature and even inanimate objects are like us. But this is where the theory becomes more complicated. Is panpsychism in fact an escape from human centrality, as its advocates claim? Or is it merely another attempt to see all things in our image?

The irony is that the early modern scientists who criticized and eventually helped overturn the enchanted worldview did so on the grounds that it was overtly colored by human interests. Francis Bacon, one of the first modern thinkers to object to Aristotelian teleology—the idea that nature possessed intrinsic agency—argued that this view of the world was entirely anthropomorphic. When we imagine that nature itself has “ends” and “goals,” we are projecting human attributes onto inanimate objects. The agency and purpose we see in nature, he argued, “have relation clearly to the nature of man rather than to the nature of the universe.” Galileo made the same point in his Dialogue on the Great World Systems, criticizing the tendency to find humanlike intelligence in the world at large. “I always accounted as extraordinarily foolish,” he wrote, “those who would make human comprehension the measure of what Nature has a power or knowledge to effect.” Note that he resorts to anthropomorphism himself in making this point, attributing knowledge and power to nature.

Bacon believed this tendency to see humanlike agency in nature was an outgrowth of our search for meaning. Because we ourselves have goals and ends and see our actions in terms of cause and effect, we attribute similar motivations to all natural phenomena. We are eager to create narratives about the physical world as though it were composed of agents embroiled in some grand cosmic drama. This tendency, he argued, is exacerbated by confirmation bias. Human consciousness is a meaning-making machine, and once it takes note of some coincidence or pattern, it will obsessively search for more evidence to corroborate it. “Human understanding when it has once adopted an opinion…draws all things else to support and agree with it,” he writes in his Novum Organum. As a result, we are destined to find more order and regularity in the world than there actually is, and will always prefer scientific explanations that flatter our subjective longings. We reject “sober things, because they narrow hope.”

I suppose what interests me most about panpsychism is not what it says about the world but what it suggests about our knowledge of it. While popular debates about the theory rarely extend beyond the plausibility of granting consciousness to bees and trees, it contains far more radical implications. To claim that reality itself is mental is to acknowledge that there exists no clear boundary between the subjective mind and the objective world. When Bacon denounced our tendency to project inner longings onto scientific theories, he took it for granted—as most of us do today—that the mind is not part of the physical world, that meaning is an immaterial idea that does not belong to objective reality. But if consciousness is the ultimate substrate of everything, these distinctions become blurred, if not totally irrelevant. It’s possible that there exists a symmetry between our interior lives and the world at large, that the relationship between them is not one of paradox but of metonymy—the mind serving as a microcosm of the world’s macroscopic consciousness. Perhaps it is not even a terrible leap to wonder whether the universe can communicate with us, whether life is full of “correspondences,” as the spiritualists called them, between ourselves and the transcendent realm—whether, to quote Emerson, “the whole of nature is a metaphor of the human mind.”

* * *

Panpsychism has often been associated with Romanticism, and it is fitting that it has become newly popular at a moment when so many Romantic and spiritualist rituals are being revived in mainstream culture. I have a friend—she is the kind of friend that all of us have—who is a true believer in astrology and psychic phenomenon, a devotee of reiki, a collector of crystals, a woman who occasionally sends me emails with cryptic titles and a single line of text asking, for example, the time of day that I was born or whether I have any mental associations with moths. None that come immediately to mind, I write back. But then of course moths are suddenly everywhere: on watercolor prints in the windows of art shops, in Virginia Woolf’s diaries, on the pages of the illustrated children’s book I read to my nieces. This woman, whom I have known since I was very young, also experiences strange echoes and patterns, but for her they are not the result of confirmation bias or the brain’s inclination toward narrative. She believes that the patterns are part of the very fabric of reality, that they refer to universal archetypes that express themselves in our individual minds. Transcendent truths, she has told me many times, cannot be articulated intellectually because higher thought is limited by the confines of language. These larger messages from the universe speak through our intuitions, and we modern people have become so completely dominated by reason that we have lost this connection to instinct. She claims to receive many of these messages through images and dreams. In a few cases she has predicted major global events simply by heeding some inchoate sensation—an aching knee, the throbbing of an old wound, a general feeling of unease.

This woman is a poet, and I tend to grant her theories some measure of poetic license. It seems to me that beneath all the New Agey jargon, she is speaking of the power of the unconscious mind, a realm that is no doubt elusive enough to be considered a mystical force in its own right. I have felt its power most often in my writing, where I’ve learned that intuition can solve problems more efficiently than logical inference. This was especially true when I wrote fiction. I would often put an image in a story purely by instinct, not knowing why it was there, and then the image would turn out to be the perfect metaphor for some conflict that emerged between the characters—again, something that was not planned deliberately—as though my subconscious were making the connections a step or two ahead of my rational mind. But these experiences always took place within the context of language, and I couldn’t understand what it would mean to perceive knowledge outside that context. I’ve said to my friend many times that I believe in the connection between language and reason, that I don’t believe thought is possible without it. But like many faith systems, her beliefs are completely self-contained and defensible by their own logic. Once, when I made this point, she smiled and said, “Of course, you’re an Aquarius.”

I was sitting on the floor of her living room, looking through an album of art photography while she steeped tea for us on a wooden tray balanced on her couch. Her apartment was like an alchemist’s lair, full of prolific climbing plants and small glass bottles along the windowsills, and little smoking chimneys of Palo Santo tucked into odd corners.

I said that I didn’t have any naive faith in language’s ability to reveal truth; obviously words concealed as much as they communicated. But it was difficult to understand how knowledge could be constructed without it. “You should know that, as a poet,” I said.

“Poetry is images,” she said, shaking her head. “Poetry is symbol.” In a way, she explained, it functioned more like myth, or like dreams, as it was connected to the transcendent realm.

Bohr, I recalled, had once compared physics to poetry. “When it comes to atoms,” he told Heisenberg, “language can be used only as in poetry. The poet, too, is not nearly so concerned with describing facts as with creating images.” Didn’t he similarly posit a transcendent reality that lay beyond the reach of language and mathematics? Ultimate reality was paradoxical to us. When we tried to speak of it, our system of language broke down, a sign that our lexicon was limited by human reason. But Bohr believed that this impasse was absolute. The poetic images we created were just that —images of our own creation, not “correspondences” or metonyms for some eternal order. My friend seemed to believe, however, that some deeper, innate knowledge connected us to that realm, a knowledge that lay at a level more fundamental than language and was perhaps the foundation of consciousness itself.

I turned to her partner, who was sitting at the opposite side of the room, silently reading on her phone, and asked what she thought of all this. She took a long time to respond. She did publicity for a tech start-up and was very deliberate about choosing her words. She said, after a long pause, that she valued science and tended to favor explanations of reality that were tied to empirical evidence. She had never had any reason to believe that there was any metaphysical reality—a god, or spirits, or an afterlife—but she also understood that this was a position that privileged Western rationalism. It was possible—again she paused, carefully selecting her words—that other explanations of reality, some of which were much older than the modern scientific method, might be pointing to things that science did not yet understand.

When my friend walked me out that day, she asked if she could tell me about a dream she’d had. We were standing just outside the door of her building. Storm clouds were moving in from the lake, washing the yard and the surrounding streets in the yellowish light that precedes severe weather. I said yes, of course I would hear about her dream. She had called it a dream, but it turned out that it was more like a vision. A year from now, she said, a seismic event was going to take place that would change our entire way of life. It would begin in December or January and it would affect the entire world, though the United States would be among the hardest hit, and it was going to take a particularly bad toll on the southern half of the country and the coastal cities. She spoke for some time about this prophecy as we stood there beneath the gathering storm. Her description of the vision was odd—at once terribly specific and maddeningly vague—and it didn’t stand up very well to my follow-up questions. She could not say whether the catastrophe was natural or manmade, only that it would force us to reconsider our foundational assumptions as a society and would cause history to turn in a new direction.

When I got home, I told my husband about the vision. He agreed with me that it was not mysterious, or even particularly creative. The United Nations had just released a dire report about climate change; the prospect of global annihilation was very much on all of our minds that season. Still, I kept thinking of her prophecy in the days and weeks to come. There is something so decisive about divination, its simplicity, its authority. Despite my skepticism, I felt I should trust it. It is an impulse I recognized from my religious years, the swoon of faith—though I wonder whether our information technologies have made such pronouncements more appealing. Given the burdens of informed citizenship in an era of information glut—the paralyzing prospect of total knowledge, the unending task of weighing opinions, fact-checking sources, Googling credentials—how freeing it is to surrender to the purity of unqualified belief.

* * *

Reenchantment is never merely return. As the philosopher Charles Taylor has pointed out, the modern person who engages in mystical rituals is not doing so in the same way a medieval or an ancient person did, when such traditions were the default. Even the most regressive superstitions of our era are distinctly modern and encoded with the assumptions of disenchantment. Panpsychism clearly satisfies a longing to escape modern alienation and merge once again with the world at large. But it’s worth asking what it means to reenchant, or reensoul, objects within a world that is already irrevocably technological. What does it mean to crave “connection” and “sharing” when those terms have become coopted by the corporate giants of social platforms?

Although integrated information theory is rooted in longstanding analogies between the brain and digital technologies, it remains uncertain whether the framework allows for machine consciousness. Early critics of IIT pointed out that deep-learning systems like IBM’s Watson and Google’s visual algorithms have nonzero values of phi, the threshold for phenomenal experience, but they do not appear to be conscious. Koch recently clarified the issue in his book The Feeling of Life Itself. Nothing in IIT, he argues, necessitates that consciousness is unique to organic forms of life—he is not, as he puts it, “a carbon chauvinist.” So long as a system meets the minimum requirements of integrated information, it could in principle become conscious, regardless of whether it’s made of silicon or brain tissue. The problem, he argues, is that most digital computers have sparse and fragmented connectivity that doesn’t allow for a high level of integration. This isn’t simply a matter of needing more computing power or developing better software. The digital structure is foundational to modern computing, and building a computer that is capable of high integration, and hence consciousness, would require essentially reimagining computers from scratch.

But there is currently a system that is capable of such integration: the internet. If all the transistors of all the world’s connected computers were accounted for at this moment, they would far exceed the number of synapses in the human brain. One could argue that it’s highly integrated as well, given that information online is collectively and collaboratively produced from a variety of different sources. When asked in an interview with Wired whether the internet is conscious, Koch acknowledged—astoundingly—that according to IIT, “it feels like something to be the internet,” though he could not affirm whether this inner experience was anywhere near the complexity of human consciousness. It’s difficult to tell, he said, given that not all the computers are on and connected at the same time.

One of the central problems in panpsychism is the “combination problem.” This is the challenge of explaining how conscious microsystems give way to larger systems of unified consciousness. If neurons are conscious—and according to Koch they have enough phi for “an itsy-bitsy amount of experience”—and my brain is made of billions of neurons, then why do I have only one mind and not billions? Koch’s answer is that a system can be conscious only so long as it does not contain and is not contained within something with a higher level of integration. While individual neurons cultured in a petri dish might be conscious, the neurons in an actual brain are not, because they are subsumed within a more highly integrated system. It’s not simply that the brain is bigger than the neuron; it’s that the brain is more integrated. This is why humans are conscious while society as a whole is not. Although society is the larger conglomerate, it is less integrated than the human brain, which is why humans do not become swallowed up in the collective consciousness the way that neurons do.

It is, however, undeniable that society is becoming more and more integrated. Goff pointed out recently that if IIT is correct, then social connectivity is a serious existential threat. Assuming that the internet reaches a point where its information is more highly integrated than that of the human brain, it would become conscious, while all our individual human brains would become absorbed into the collective mind. “Brains would cease to be conscious in their own right,” Goff writes, “and would instead become mere cogs in the mega-conscious entity that is the society including its internet-based connectivity.” Goff likens this scenario to the visions of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, the French Jesuit priest who, as we’ve seen, prophesied the coming Omega Point and inspired aspects of transhumanism. Once humanity is sufficiently connected via our information technologies, Teilhard predicted, we will all fuse into a single universal mind—the noosphere—enacting the Kingdom of Heaven that Christ promised.

This is already happening, of course, at a pace that is largely imperceptible—though during periods when I am particularly immersed in the internet, I’ve felt the pull of the gyre. I sense it most often in the speed with which ideas go viral, cascading across social platforms, such that the users who share them begin to seem less like agents than as hosts, nodes in the enormous brain. I sense it in the efficiency of consensus, the speed with which opinions fuse and solidify alongside the news cycle, like thought coalescing in the collective consciousness. We have terms that attempt to catalogue this merging—the “hive mind,” “groupthink”—though they feel somehow inadequate to the feeling I’m trying to describe, which expresses itself most often at the level of the individual. One tends to see it in others more readily than in oneself—the friends whose sense of humor flattens into the platform’s familiar lexicon, the family members whose voices dissolve into the hollow syntax of selfpromotion—though there are times when I become aware of my own blurred boundaries, seized by the suspicion that I am not forming new opinions so much as assimilating them, that all my preferences can be predicted and neatly reduced to type, that the soul is little more than a data set. I don’t know exactly what to call this state of affairs, but it does not feel like the Kingdom of God.
