---
book: "God, Human, Animal, Machine"
author: "Meghan O'Gieblyn"
part: "Metonymy"
chapter: 10
source_pages: "167-176"
type: source
---

# Chapter 10 — Metonymy

In a 2019 essay David Chalmers notes that when he was in graduate school, there was a saying about philosophers: “One starts as a materialist, then one becomes a dualist, then a panpsychist, and one ends up as an idealist.” Although Chalmers cannot account for where the truism originated, he argues that its logic is more or less intuitive. In the beginning one is impressed by the success of science and its ability to reduce everything to causal mechanisms. Then, once it becomes clear that materialism has not managed to explain consciousness, dualism begins to seem more attractive. Eventually the inelegance of dualism leads one to a greater appreciation for the inscrutability of matter, which leads to the embrace of panpsychism. By taking each of these frameworks to their logical yet unsatisfying conclusions, “one comes to think that there is little reason to believe in anything beyond consciousness and that the physical world is wholly constituted by consciousness.” This is idealism.

Chalmers notes that to a certain extent this progression characterizes the evolution of theories of mind across the past seventy or so years. The cyberneticists of the 1950s and ’60s were strict materialists who mostly avoided the term “consciousness” or believed that consciousness was nothing more than the chemical processes in the brain. While this idea is still arguably the consensus in neuroscience and artificial intelligence, popular movements have attempted to refute it. The 1980s and 1990s saw the rise of dualisms —the idea that the mind is the software of the brain, or that consciousness somehow emerges as a property of matter. This was followed in the early 2000s with a renewed interest in panpsychism, and now we are beginning to hear, as Chalmers put it, “some recent stirrings of idealism.”

The philosopher Bernardo Kastrup took a shortcut through this trajectory, converting directly from materialism to idealism. After completing his doctorate in computer science, he took a job at CERN, which he calls “a cathedral of physicalism.” It was while working on neural networks that the significance of Chalmers’s hard problem of consciousness hit him “like a brick.” Consciousness, he realized, would never arise from electrical circuits, no matter how closely they resembled the structure of the human brain. Quantities could not generate qualities. It occurred to him that the mind-matter dichotomy relied on a false equivalence: the assumption that these two things belong to the same epistemic category. How could anyone argue that the existence of matter is as certain as the existence of mind? Consciousness is all we can know for certain. We know from direct experience that we see images and colors and movement, but to call those images “matter” involves an inferential leap that is rarely acknowledged. Matter, he concluded, was an “explanatory abstraction.” Mainstream physicalism had then taken this error a step further, arguing that matter is more real than mind, that mind must be reduced to matter. The physicalist, according to Kastrup, “dismisses its own primary, first-person point of view in favor of an abstract third-person perspective.”

The mind-matter dichotomy is at root an error of language, Kastrup believes. When we give a name to first-person experience —“mind,” or “consciousness”—we necessarily objectify that which is subjective. This is a category mistake. It allows us to believe that consciousness is just another object in the world, like any material thing, and not in fact what it is: the underlying substrate of matter. This conclusion is more or less a return to Descartes’s cogito: all we can know for certain is thought and perception. But unlike Descartes, Kastrup does not attempt to use this knowledge as a foundation for rebuilding a belief in the material world. Like most idealists, he has come to believe that consciousness is all that exists. “Reality is fundamentally experiential,” he writes in his 2019 book The Idea of the World.

Kastrup’s was one of those names that kept constantly popping up during the period a couple years ago when I was experiencing strange coincidences. I’d hear his name dropped on podcasts and in interviews with other philosophers, sometimes more than once in a single day. One afternoon I came across an article of his in Scientific American titled “Could Multiple Personality Disorder Explain Life, the Universe, and Everything?” It was plainly clickbait, one of those popular science articles that dresses up modest experimental findings in sensationalist language, but I clicked anyway and discovered that the title was only a slight exaggeration. Kastrup, along with two other authors, argued that the world is just one universal consciousness and that the physical world is the extrinsic appearance of this cosmic mind.

The universal mind—whether it goes by God, Brahman, or some other name—is a common feature of idealism. Without it, it’s difficult to explain why there is a shared, objective world that all of us experience, making the theory indistinguishable from solipsism. The cosmic mind also ensures that this objective world continues to exist independently of human perception—that trees still fall in the woods even when no one hears them. Bishop Berkeley, the eighteenthcentury idealist philosopher, imagined that the infinite and omnipresent mind of God kept the world in perpetual existence simply by looking at it. Kastrup and his colleagues offered a unique spin on this trope. All living, conscious creatures were the “disassociated alters” of the cosmic mind. This was terminology borrowed from disassociated identity disorder, or DID, the phenomenon in which a person develops several autonomous personalities. In most cases these “alters” are operationally distinct: when one personality is in charge, the others have no knowledge of what is happening. This has recently been supported with empirical evidence. In one study a woman who claimed that some of her alters were blind was hooked up to an EEG. The researchers discovered that when the blind alters were in charge, the sight center of her brain went completely blank, despite the fact that her eyes were open. The processes behind this condition are still not understood, but Kastrup argues that it provides a clue as to how consciousness functions on a universal scale. “If something analogous to DID happens at a universal level,” the authors wrote, “the one universal consciousness could, as a result, give rise to many alters with private inner lives like yours and ours.”

As harebrained as this might sound, the argument is compelling for technical and philosophical reasons. The DID analogy is a way of solving a longstanding objection to idealism: if we’re all one mind, then why are there limits to our perception—why can’t I know what someone else is thinking, or even what is happening in distant galaxies? If each of us were an alter of the cosmic mind, it would explain how this universal consciousness broke itself into distinctive minds—a conundrum known as the “decomposition problem.” All living, sentient creatures were broken-off parts of this conscious whole, while the inanimate world was a kind of vision dreamed up by the cosmic mind.

Descartes needed God to prove that the external world exists. Kastrup does not believe in the material world and yet needs God to prove it doesn’t exist. Was this simply intellectual laziness, appealing to a “God of the gaps” to patch over the chasms in a theory’s logic? Or is there something more telling—and more troubling—in the fact that God keeps barging into philosophy long after we declared him dead? If it’s true, as Philip K. Dick said, that something is real if it doesn’t go away when you stop believing in it, does that mean that God in some sense exists?

* * *

Kastrup lays out his theory of idealism most comprehensively in The Idea of the World, a book that offers a critique of materialism and makes the case that antimaterialism is more philosophically convincing. Antimaterialism is often confused for an antagonism toward science, but almost all contemporary idealists affirm the usefulness and importance of the physical sciences. One can speak of the behavior of atoms, their properties, their relationships, regardless of whether one believes they are composed of matter or information or emanations of the cosmic mind. Materialism oversteps into metaphysics, Kastrup argues, only when it insists that matter is the true essence of the world, a claim for which there is no proof.

Of course, Kastrup’s universal mind is also purely speculative, impossible to test or prove. Kastrup mostly avoids the term “God,” with or without the capital letter. He doesn’t believe the cosmic mind is omniscient, omnipotent, or benevolent; most likely it is not even self-reflective, or self-aware. But he believes that some support for universal consciousness can be found in quantum physics. Some physicists have suggested that the cosmos is one entangled system, meaning it is not made up of individual systems but is itself an irreducible whole (the universe, when seen at the largest scale, Kastrup notes, resembles an enormous neural network). Just as individual consciousness consists of “excitations” of mind, so the entire observable world is patterns of excitation of this universal mind —an idea that squares with interpretations like quantum field theory and M-theory, a framework that holds that electrons and protons are not particles but strings of vibrating energy. He speculates that superposition—the state in which a particle remains in a state of uncertainty before observation—is evidence that the cosmic mind is in a state of indecision.

I find all this highly implausible—though not necessarily more implausible than the hypothesis that consciousness arises out of inert matter, or that the mind is software, or that observation can collapse a wave into a particle, or that the mind does not exist at all. Chalmers, a philosopher who has thought about consciousness as deeply as anyone has, concludes that Kastrup’s brand of idealism is among the most plausible new theories of mind. Perhaps this is what was meant by the graduate-school truism about the trajectory from materialism to idealism. By the time you seriously consider all the options and their limitations, the idea of God begins to seem just as crazy as anything else.

I hesitate to write this, knowing how it will sound. Does it matter that I grew up religious and might not be capable of distinguishing compelling logic from simple familiarity? Does it matter that Kastrup, in all the podcasts and interviews I listened to, struck me as trustworthy—modest, erudite, cautious, a philosopher not interested in courting controversy but committed to truth despite its cost? Does it matter that Kastrup himself has admitted to having a “monist disposition,” which might have led him to prefer the elegance of idealism for purely aesthetic reasons? Such considerations have become part of my intellectual hygiene, a way of rooting out the subjective longings that cloud reason. But this logic of self-scrutiny arrives at a curious impasse when it comes to idealism. After all, the very notion of “wishful thinking” as a term of disparagement comes from the disenchanted view that the mind is less real than the objective world. It is the psychic cost of the Cartesian partition, of believing for centuries that our minds are immaterial and insulated from the physical world. If the very nature of the world is subjective, Kastrup writes in The Idea of the World, “the meanings we think to discern in the world may not, after all, be more personal projections, but actual properties of the world.” Idealism entails that the physical world is amenable to interpretation and semantic meaning in the same way that dreams are, he claims. “Each of us, as individuals, can now give ourselves permission to dedicate our lives to finding meaning in the world,” Kastrup writes, “reassured by the knowledge that this meaning is really there.”

I thought of my friend the poet and her belief that the mind can perceive what lies beyond our immediate sensory perception through intuition. Mark Twain, who believed that the universe spoke to him through visions, opted for a technological metaphor. He called his premonitions “mental telegraphy,” as though they were electronic dispatches from the noumenal realm. The French philosopher Henri Bergson likened the mind to a radio that might be tuned into a cosmic channel, switching from everyday perception to spiritual transcendence. The radio analogy has often been used in other contexts to critique the materialist view of consciousness. The neuroscientist David Eagleman once argued that if a Bushman happened upon a transistor radio, he might conclude, after taking the thing apart and investigating its wiring, that it was a self-contained causal mechanism. When you move one wire, the voices stop. When you put the wire back in, the voices return. He would believe he understood the contraption completely, all while remaining ignorant of that which transcended his wildest imagination: radio waves, electromagnetism, modern civilization. Maybe that’s where we were in our own theories of mind: pointing out petty causal relationships, completely ignorant of what was really going on. Perhaps perception could extend beyond itself, beyond language, to touch the noumenal, the thing in itself.

* * *

The problem is that my experience has never given me reason to believe this is possible. It’s true that life is full of patterns and signs, many of them so intricate and charged it seems impossible that they could have come about by chance alone. But I’ve never managed to translate these uncanny semiotics into even one cogent sentence. The patterns never amount to anything. The voices never utter a clear revelation. In most cases experiencing these echoes feels less like receiving a message than like eavesdropping on the runic mutterings of higher beings, a conversation that has nothing to do with me and my interests. Perhaps this comes down to nothing more than a lack of faith. It doesn’t escape me that many people, like my friend the poet, manage to find coherence in these patterns, nor am I unaware that this inability to trust the coherence I sense in the world is the same weakness that contributed to my apostasy. It’s not as though I never experienced God’s presence or guidance as a Christian; it was that I could not, as so many of my friends and classmates managed to do, rule out the possibility that those signs and assurances were merely narratives I was constructing.

Idealism and panpsychism are appealing in that they offer a way of believing once again in the mind—not as an illusion or an epiphenomenon but as a feature of our world that is as real as anything else. But its proponents rarely stop there. In some cases they go on to make the larger claim that there must therefore exist some essential symmetry between the mind and the world, that the patterns we observe in our interior lives correspond to a more expansive, transcendent truth. Proponents of these theories occasionally appeal to quantum physics to argue that the mindmatter dichotomy is false—clearly there exists some mysterious relationship between the two. But one could just as easily argue that physics has, on the contrary, affirmed this chasm, demonstrating that the world at its most fundamental level is radically other than ourselves—that the universe is, as Erwin Schrödinger put it, “not even thinkable.”

This is precisely the modern tension that Arendt calls attention to in The Human Condition. On the one hand, the appearance of order in the world—the elegance of physical laws, the usefulness of mathematics—tempts us to believe that our mind is made in its image, that “the same patterns rule the macrocosm and the microcosm alike.” In the enchanted world order was seen as proof of eternal unity, evidence that God was present in all things, but for the modern person this symmetry leads inevitably back to Cartesian doubt—the suspicion that the order perceived stems from some mental deception. We have good reason to entertain such suspicions, Arendt argues. Since Copernicus and Galileo, science has overturned the most basic assumptions about reality and suggested that our sensory perception is unreliable. This conclusion became unavoidable with the discovery of general relativity and quantum physics, which suggest that “causality, necessity, and lawfulness are categories inherent in the human brain and applicable only to the common-sense experiences of earthbound creatures.” We keep trying to reclaim the Archimedean point, hoping that science will allow us to transcend the prison of our perception and see the world objectively. But the world that science reveals is so alien and bizarre that whenever we try to look beyond our human vantage point, we are confronted with our own reflection. “It is really as though we were in the hands of an evil spirit,” Arendt writes, alluding to Descartes’s thought experiment, “who mocks us and frustrates our thirst for knowledge, so that whenever we search for that which we are not, we encounter only the patterns of our own minds.”

That is not to say that the Archimedean point is no longer possible. In her 1963 essay “The Conquest of Space and the Stature of Man,” Arendt considers this modern problem in light of emerging technologies. The oddest thing, she notes, is that even though our theories about the world are limited and simplistic and probably wrong, they “work” when implemented into technologies. Despite the fact that nobody understands what quantum mechanics is telling us about the world, the entire computer age—including every semiconductor, starting with the very first transistor, built in 1947—has rested on well-modeled quantum behavior and reliable quantum equations. The problem is not merely that we cannot understand the world but that we can now build this alien logic into our devices. There are some scientists, Arendt notes, who claim that computers can do “what a human brain cannot comprehend.” Her italics are instructive: it’s not merely that computers can transcend us in sheer brain power—solving theorems faster than we can, finding solutions more efficiently—but that they can actually understand the world in a way that we cannot. She found this proposition especially alarming. “If it should be true…that we are surrounded by machines whose doings we cannot comprehend although we have devised and constructed them,” she writes, “it would mean that the theoretical perplexities of the natural sciences on the highest level have invaded our everyday world.” This conclusion was remarkably prescient.
