---
book: "Beyond Modern Sculpture: The Effects of Science and Technology on the Sculpture of This Century"
author: "Jack Burnham"
part: "Two — Sculpture as System"
chapter: "Chapter 5 — Sculpture and Automata"
source_pages: "pp. 185–217"
type: source
---

# Chapter 5 · Sculpture and Automata

## A Continuum of Images

We are just beginning to understand the great latitude of purpose detectable in the human and animal replicas created by man in the past ten thousand years. Fetishes, idols, amulets, funeral images, dolls, waxworks, manikins, puppets, and, most dramatically, automata, all play their part in the vast substratum of figures which historians used to rank far below sculpture as a fine art. Many of these artifacts have a basis rooted, not in any Western concept of beauty, but in some very practical purpose. And only recently have the liberalizing tendencies of modern art and the discoveries of archaeology finally compelled historians to consider the aesthetic merits of these and an increasing range of other anthropomorphic forms. A "history of human images," free of what the art historian Wilenski refers to as "the Greek prejudice," has yet to be written. This section does not attempt to provide that history; rather, it follows the Western development of one particular branch of subsculpture: automata.

The term subsculpture refers here to types of images aesthetically ranked below sculpture and not included in the fine arts. Already some of this subsculpture has crossed the boundary line of scholarship into the category of major art. In time the psychological motives behind the drive to create human images will assume greater importance than the supposed hierarchical levels of beauty which separate those images into minor and major art.

Automata may be defined as all seemingly self-propelled or self-animated images of animals or men. The history of automata has always run close to that of technology. Both the feats of automata and the progression of outward forms assumed by automata indicate a parallel pulse in modern art and technology. Therefore, this chapter will contain considerable mention of those assumed forms as well as other types of subsculpture, such as dolls and manikins. What must be scrutinized, and what characterizes Western culture beyond these other forms of subsculpture, is the progressive mechanization of automata. Here the aesthetic core of the Faustian urge shows itself; Western man unknowingly converges art with a universal desire to re-create life nonbiologically.

This last is an assumption which may be disputed. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that the ultimate concern of the maker of anthropomorphic images is to "bring to life" the human-shaped entity, though not through natural biological creation. In the past this has been achieved by the metaphorical subtlety of art, by attempts at precise mimetic representation, through supposed magical properties, or, as in the case of automata, by literal movement and animation. Generally, this last embodies the fewest psychical reverberations. While it denies aesthetic-religious sensitivity, it has become the most expedient.

There is great poignancy in the fact that so many of the images fashioned are attempts to reproduce man. To some extent these invariably fail to match the qualities of higher living organisms. As the male gender plays only a brief role in procreation, the drive to create images (also technical inventions) is, in part, a sublimation of the act of birth. A reproduction of self, or of beings friendly to one's species, by nonbiological means must also be viewed as an attempt to bring ideal life into one's midst; this would be company or a presence-in an age before accelerated invention-s-capable of swaying fortune in the image maker's favor. Such is the psychology of fetish images, of idols, and sometimes even of puppets or dolls. It is only a step from fashioning a figure, expected to affect an owner's life, to desire for a potent image possessing the power of movement, one which can alter the convictions of an entire people. In myths and legends a recurrent theme is the turning of inert material into living tissue; there is also the converse: solidifying humans into statues. With this last goes the knowledge that flesh is transitory and painful, while static being is eternal security-yet, as with the Greek kouroi, touchingly in need of protection.

The story of Pygmalion begins with the sculptor's disgust with female carnality and ends with the blessings of Venus. Pygmalion fashions an ideal female figure of ivory but is not content with admiration. He becomes progressively infatuated with his creation, Galatea, which miraculously comes to life. This short tale, as told by Ovid in his Metamorphoses, foretells the mystical equation of all art: that with hard work and faith in divine results a creation may magically become more than the sum of the artist's energies. Though, as Ovid is careful to observe, elephant bone into lovely female flesh is not an altogether happy exchange. Deterioration and death through decay are the ultimate ends even after successful love-making.

The psychic reality of a body and mind coming alive because of sexual love was linked by Ovid to the act of sculpturing. However, the ancient methods of animating images falls somewhat short of Pygmalion's transference of passion. There were two methods for providing inert figures with a semblance of free will and autonomy. Direct human manipulation is probably the oldest, while within the history of automata proper are the gradual refinements of mechanical techniques. As for realism, waxworks and funeral images come closer to mimetic perfection than even the best classical sculpture or automata. Something else draws sculpture and automata toward one another-the joint religious and magical functions which they both shared until modern times.

As Spengler would concede, sculpture, in its quietude arid static order, remains Apollonian while automata possess a Faustian drive to transcend natural limitations. Both forms of image making play with divine madness: sculpture coolly, with a sense of well-defined limit and a knowledge of probable success; but not automata, where the soul of the artist is tied to mechanical fallibility and madness lies in the indefinite possibilities of technology. Thus the machine radiates an impertinence for everything that stands still about it. It revels in drastic change.

Like the illusions of a magician, the pathos of automata lies in that they are doomed to failure, not only by physical disintegration, but in the mind of the beholder, by a final sense of inconviction. This sculpture would never tolerate. But suppose automata had been raised to the level of a fine art thousands of years ago, would we today have an aesthetic of moving statuary? Or would it have been an impossibility; for, as Arnold Toynbee maintains, mechanics cannot help but erode the soul of art? Automata since the sixteenth century have intrigued the public without frightening or intimidating them. The average person craves "safe" magic, the titillation and tiny ecstasy afforded by the occult kept securely in its cage. Gradually automata lost their divinity and were regarded as base creatures; they did what they were constructed to do and, unlike sculpture, made no seductive promises. Only an occasional philosopher, and those few scientifically curious souls who wondered about the ultimate structure of life, sought profound meaning in the making of mechanical men. It must be remembered that the most talented androids found serious acceptance as scientific marvels in an age which did not trifle with distinctions between science and technology-or for that matter with distinctions between science and art! Partially this explains the happy circumstance between sculpture and automata in the eighteenth century, a period just prior to the full effects of the technological onslaught. It was a situation in which the arts freely admitted and encouraged scientific aid. No paralytic fear of creative impedimentation yet existed. For the human intellect automata have always been a source of compelling fascination; though in terms of the emotional resonances generated automata have assumed a very secondary role to sculpture.

## Egyptian Proto-Automata

Egyptian servant figures, while they might remain fixed in their poses for thousands of years, should be regarded as fledgling automata. The historian James Breasted has placed the height of the tradition of the servant sculptures in the Middle Kingdom. There, in chambers adjacent to the tombs, or sometimes next to the sarcophagus, were placed whole tableaus of retainers working at various tasks. These wooden models, at first crudely made in the Pre-Dynastic era, became literally the entourage which accompanied a rich man or powerful ruler into the next world.

The tradition for these sculptures most probably originated in the custom of mass human sacrifice carried out following the death of an important person. With the decease of the head of a large household, or a kingdom, favorite concubines and valued servants were chosen to follow their master directly to the grave. The tragic custom of consigning members of a household to the same fate as their master had severely destructive consequences for the remaining society. Providing company and assistance into the next world proved rather hard on the chosen victims. Servant images became the logical form of substitution.

Tableaus of laboring servants often unfolded within a specially constructed complex of scale-model rooms and courtyards. Many such structures still exist. In addition to showing other than the most rudimentary gestures needed for the performance of a craft, servant figures also offered the valuable function of preserving the lives of those represented. The first substitute images for servants were nearly shapeless terra-cotta forms. Painted wood became the most commonly used material for more elaborate models. Often the arms of these wood figures were pegged so they could be manipulated from the shoulders. The variety and subtlety of these work gestures give a far clearer indication of the daily lives of the Egyptian people than the stiff, hieratic portraiture of the upper classes. One could consider these wooden figures proto-automata. While not self-propelled, they do possess the option of alternate positions.

More actively, automata were used by ruling factions for magical-religious purposes. The priesthood controlled the masses, and often even the royal family. This control was accomplished through the adroit manipulation of large and small animated statues. Since priests were the only ones who could invest images with an animus or soul (called Ka), they could create either good or evil. Supernatural prediction determined a good deal of the political policy of Egypt, so that certain stone images, transformed into speaking oracles, became all-important in the politics of formulating attitudes and desires. The mechanics of making a statue speak were quite simple. A priest would secrete himself behind the image. As he spoke into a depression hollowed in the back of the figure, his voice was transmitted through a tube-like passage to a hidden opening in back of the ear of the statue. At Thebes, reportedly, there existed images capable of making gestures as they spoke. For a considerable stage in the development of religion, the dividing line between magician and priest was nonexistent.

## Greek Ritual: Orgiastic and Mechanical

In Greece movable play dolls and articulate votive figures have been found that date from as early as the eighth century One bell-shaped

B.C. figure with swinging legs dates from the Proto-Geometric period. This Boeotian doll has painted black-figure dancers ringing its exterior. The famous scholars of automata, Chapuis and Droz, (1958, pp. 16-17) also depict a small seated Aphrodite of the Hellenistic era. On this figure the arms swing free by means of metal pins. Some of the dolls unearthed most probably served as the consecrated offerings of adolescent girls ready to exchange their playthings for marriage. None of these are strictly automata, or even sculpture, but they do anticipate the technical facility, if not functionalism, that would mark the decline of Classical culture with the beginning of the Hellenistic era.

In all the civilizations which have come and gone, perhaps no more dramatically than in Greece could we witness the fatal interaction between religion and technology through the medium of art. The fate of Classical expression was marked long before Alexandria stood as the hub of scientific endeavor, and long before Hero became its master inventor with numerous moving marvels and automatic theatres. The ancients may have looked upon Hero's Apotheosis of Dionysus as a clever entertainment, but we possess the perspective to view it as something more. Reviewing the origins of Greek art and religious ritual, the mechanical Dionysus looms up, not as cultural progress, but as an omen of the exhaustion of spiritual and physical vitality.

Greek mythology was guided in its characterizations of the gods by the intuition that they, like mortals, were neither all good nor all bad. Even in sculpted form such pragmatism toward the deportment of the deities can be seen. This resulted from a one-way relationship. The Greeks felt that the gods' power over mortals was unlimited and constant, yet human intervention into the affairs of the gods was impossible. Also statues could not communicate with their human creators. Thus relationships which arose between mortals and the gods-deities who remained motionless, implacably serene in marble and precious metal-avoided direct confrontation. This separation between the Greek citizen and his world of god images, between everyday existence and transcendent life, represented not only an aesthetic attitude but a form of practical metaphysics.

"Born of pressing human needs and desires, images projected by active and even anxious ritual, they pass into the upper air and dwell aloof, spectatorlike and all but spectral." In this concise description (1913, p. 203), the historian Jane Harrison designated the protocol which existed between ancient Athenian and the inanimate image. Miss Harrison sets out a vivid theory for the common origin and branching connections between the cycles of active life and art, with ritual as the catalyst between the two. Ritual through dance is an immediate form of activity that provides a practical way for circumscribing all the activities of life. Art, somehow, is still one step further from this re-representation of life. For Miss Harrison the word mimesis has a basic function in explaining this re-representation. More than the making of a literal representation which is closer to the modern definition, mimesis was the action or doings of a mime; that is, the acting out or re-creation (even the word recreation finds its origins in the joy of making anew) of an event through feelings or gestures. Through symbolic actions it generated, not the event or thing itself, but a certain emotional state surrounding it. In either theatre or sculpture, then, realism is only a subsidiary means for achieving emotional effect. Ritual is primary, and from the object of ritual, sculpture may evolve; while from the codified actions and circumstantial variations of ritual springs drama. The fusion existing between sacred statuary and sacred drama has been lost to us in the secular segregation of the arts. Yet this fusion was not uncommon and Pausanias describes (A.D. 2, p. 203) a situation in which the wooden figure of Orthian Artemis was involved in a ritual of blood sacrifice.

[To avert further deaths resulting from quarrels over the ownership of a small wooden statue, the oracle commands the towns of Cynosura, M esoa and Pitane in Sparta to let blood on the altar housing the statue of the goddess Artemis.] And instead of a person drawn by lot being sacrificed, Lycurgus changed it to flogging the young men there, and so the altar got sprinkled with human blood. And the priestess stands by during the operation, holding the wooden statue, which is generally light from its smallness, but if the scourgers spare any young man at all in his flogging whether on account of his beauty or rank then this wooden statue in the priestess' hand becomes heavy and no longer easy to hold, and she makes complaint of the scourgers and says it is so heavy owing to them. So innate is it with this statue, in consequence of the sacrifices at the Tauric Chersonese, to delight in human blood. And they not only call the goddess Orthia, but also Bound-with-willow-twigs, because the statue was found in a willow bush, and the willows so tenaciously twined round it that they kept it in an upright position.

From this passage we can speculate that the wooden Artemis was either sculpture confused with life, i.e., proto-automaton, or a kind of embodied spirit impelling ritual to a point of frenzy. Either way it planted the seeds for a later development. More than statuary, these proto-automata were almost liturgical instruments, working hand-in-hand with the keepers of the cult.

Although later automata certainly appeared more realistic than statuary, they were never meant to transcend or take the place of the statue. Automata remained inferior, but in some respects miraculous, drama that moved independent of human interference. Ironically though, sculpture, once willed to move, becomes the symbol of ennui and spiritual fatigue. In part, the decay of religious participation and the cool conceit of technological virtuosity spawned secular and religious automata after the death of Alexander the Great. Drive-in churches and television services typify contemporary counterparts.

The place of automata in the scheme of Greek religious practice and aesthetics is by no means self-evident. The Greek decay of cultural values may ultimately have had more to do with loss of spiritual fervor than any advance in technology. Intensity lies at the core of ritual. As intensity disappeared from ritual it regathered in the sublimated form of religious drama. When intensity wanes in human actors it is only a step to seek it further in mechanical means. Jane Harrison's illustration of the stages of the Dionysian drama is relevant.

The festival was originally an agrarian rite of thanksgiving, born of the tragic joy that came with experiencing the death of Winter and the birth of Spring. Dionysus incarnate was a god of extreme contrasts in both human greatness and fallibility. His offering of the wine cup during the rite presages unlimited inspiration and a capacity for creating great harm. Unlike other gods, Dionysus gained his power through wine, and to a lesser degree through drama, so as to enter directly into the spirit and body of all human beings.

The earliest dromenon (meaning rite done or pre-drama) was a joyous celebration set in the market places of Attica and lasting five days. Such a ritual debut, by coaxing the emergence of spring, had passion and psychical meaning only as long as the country people involved harbored not 'the slightest doubt that it would bring fertility back to the soil. When doubt finally crept in and men began to reflect, the question arose, why should we take part in the proceedings? What is their meaning? Slowly the dance circle I' became a stage, and as the section devoted to seating grew the rituals passed from mass participation to organized observation. The drama became an act of watching and marble seats the symbol of inaction. "To understand and still more to contemplate life you must come out from the choral dance of life and stand apart," (1913, p. 165). Such, according to Miss Harrison, was the birth of art and the death of ritual-and also, one might add, the beginning of philosophy in ancient Greece. With the separation of actors and spectators the greatest tragedies were written and an observer could afford to become critical, or even bored.

Still, drama lacks emotional distance, the quietude necessary for aesthetic contemplation so natural to sculpture. If sophisticated automata have their roots in Greek drama rather than in sculpture, then this same loss of the capacity for uninterrupted meditation might typically be found in the hubbub of moving machinery. The machine, like the actor on the stage, engages the mind on immediate terms; both are devoid of that aloofness and serenity which surround the static object.

Yet as early as the third century the Egyptians under Ptolemy

B.C., Philadelphus constructed a Dionysus capable of pouring wine from a golden goblet. The treatise Automata by Hero of Alexandria dates five centunes later and one of its chief topics is mechanical theatres. A series of relatively simple cisterns, syphons, hydraulic conduits and counterweights explains the functioning of the theatre of Dionysus. After the apparatus was set and the water vessels filled, the ritual proceeded. The altar of Dionysus turned and positioned itself in back of the cult figure. As the altar burst into light Dionysus came to life. Refreshing liquids poured from his thyrsus and cup. With a clash of cymbals the frenzied Bacchantes danced around his perch. This dance of the follower of Dionysus was repeated as the altar automatically moved in front of the viewers (Chapuis and Droz, p. 33).

Alexandria, already under Roman jurisdiction for three hundred years, was by the time of Hero considered the southern capital of Greek learning and science. Technical exotica and penchant for architectural splendor made it the Los Angeles of the second century. These Alexandrian automata with their infusion of Eastern ideas and spectacular elaborateness presented the very dea th pangs of religious sensi bility. By this time, the dithyram b dance no longer encouraged spring with wild leaps and song by rural participants. Instead, the great turntable under Dionysus groaned as the mechanical cymbals paced the tempo of the tread milled Bacchantes.

We can look in vain for any fragments of the Alexandrian automata and precious little exists of the early Greek moving doll figures. According to the rates of decay inherent in each material, the maker of automata has always dealt with an ephemeral art, one far outdistanced by the life span of stone. Just as the human body steadily decays through life unto death, then drastically decomposes once it is interred in the ground, the fugitive life of the Greek automata must be regarded in the same sense, a fleeting procession of technical achievements, a nonliving, proto-art seen in retrospect.

## Clockwork Men Before the Enlightenment

Medieval attempts to reproduce semblances of life through automata were alternately condemned and encouraged by the Church. Mechanical figures recreating biblical scenes obviously furthered Church doctrine and were regarded as part of God's handiwork. This was not the case with the alchemical creation of homunculi, or synthetic flesh-and-blood reconstructions considered the work of the devil. Medieval strictures against magic, alchemy, and early science were never precisely defined by the hierarchy; thus some monks practiced in all three fields at the same time.

The early church scholar and scientist Albertus Magnus was reputed to have made a working life-size servant from wood, metal, leather, and thread. Pious and somber Thomas Aquinas destroyed another android, an automata in human form, the creation of his teacher Albertus, because its babbling incensed Aquinas. He declared it the work of evil spirits. Actually the use of holy water, consecrated instruments, images and exorcisms by the Church differed only in intention (and perhaps slightly in means) from the modes of magic practiced by secular sorcerers. In the case of Albertus, even his primitive scientific experiments were regarded by the Church with some suspicion. This, to no small degree, accounts for the conservative reservations of Thomas Aquinas against meddling with nature. Therefore, he was canonized shortly after his death while Albertus Magnus was not elevated until 1931.

Yet the Church sought out ingenious mechanics to make automata for processions, religious cults, and cathedral tableaus. The use of machines at that time was a most impressive form of doctrinal instruction. Small stages controlled by a single driving mechanism remain as evidence in a few places of worship. Here, involved tableaus of figures moved in different directions and displayed a variety of individual actions.

The Church took full advantage of deeply rooted folk customs of the European peoples and encouraged the making and displaying of religious dolls and votive manikins. Today, for example, one can see the richly costumed "Virgin of the Pilar" which stands in a side chapel of Chartres Cathedral. The profusion of these saint images in the form of dolls with real hair, silk raiments, and costly ornaments was no doubt a creative release, being a favorite pastime of nuns who had not forsaken their maternal instincts. Highly naturalistic votive images made of wax came into popularity during the Middle Ages. These were often clothed self-replicas donated by affluent parishioners.

With the flowering of the Renaissance the ideal of a lifelike approximation of the human form became an obsession for the Western European artist. Mechanical and aerial perspective, methodical anatomical study, the unearthing of Classical sculptures and the development of oil painting all contributed to a form of mimetic representation, increasing, thereby, the difficulty of creating believable mechanized automata. Renaissance successes in sculpture and painting produced an enduring cleavage between the fine arts and the ars mechanica. The biographies of Va sari constantly reveal the author's awe of the power of realism. A Giovanni Bellini painting completed by Titian was said by Vasari (1550, p. 267) to have " ... one nude figure of a sleeping woman which is very beautiful, and appears living as indeed do the other figures." Michelangelo criticizes the drawing in a painting by Titian with these words (Vasari, 1550, p. 286): " ... for if this artist had been aided by Art and knowledge of design, as he is by nature, he would have produced works which none could surpass, more especially in imitating life .... " And Vasari agrees. Further, Vasari marvels (p. 55) at the "perfection of research" to be found in a dead Christ by Michelangelo: " ... every muscle, vein, and nerve, nor could any corpse more completely resemble the dead than does this." Or there is Soderini's remark (Vasari, 1550, p. 59) at a supposed improvement by Michelangelo of his great David- "You have given it life." Even Michelangelo, fearfully proud of the stark realism of his works, struck a groove in the knee of his Moses to signify its man-made and not heavenly origrns.

As the total Renaissance designer and inventor, Leonardo da Vinci was probably not the only artist to attempt a simulation of life in painting, sculpture, and mechanics. In depicting the variations of skin tones, no artist surpassed da Vinci. Occasionally he was asked to design spectacles of amusing automata for official pageants. His "tame lion" for Louis XII's entry into Milan was one such effort. This mechanical animal, upon being presented, walked toward the King, opened the furry costume covering its chest and revealed the French royal coat-of-arms. Leonardo's simulations of life were also carried out in private experiments. One description recounts Leonardo playing with air-filled sheep's intestines. These produced giant balloons that nearly filled the studio. Under his manipulation model birds were sent through the air powered by these inflated bladders.

If religious rites and semireligious plays were the chief stimuli for fashioning ancient automata, then the development of the mechanical clock must be regarded as the guiding spirit behind early modern automata. Several reasons exist for this. The mechanical clock, more at first than the book, produced an atmosphere that made possible modern rhythms ofliving. No longer did men mark time in the day by a series of fluctuating periods, such as the seven canonical hours used to call the members of the monasteries to prayers. Their lives were ordered by the regularity of hours and minutes. This precise periodicity and fragmentation, found only in mechanically regulated time, was a major step in breaking down the organic work pattern of the hand artisan, replacing it with the beginnings of piecework mass production. The idea of "clockwork" gradually gave man a physical conception of the universe which lasted until the present century.

The earliest clocks in the modern sense of the word originated in about the eleventh or twelfth century. These clocks were not regulated by water or sunlight, but were activated by a slowly unrolling weight attached to a rope wound around a spindle. The weight reached the ground hourly so that a "keeper of the clock" was responsible for striking a bell marking the end of an hour, then rewinding the weight to the top of the tower. The clock as a semi-autonomous mechanism grew very gradually with the application of various controlling and transmitting mechanisms. Thus, temporal precision, until the twentieth century, was the systematic application of new mechanical improvements-wheels, balances, springs, and escapements. Of prime interest is the early (mid-fourteenth century) substitution of "jacks" or jointed figures for the human "keeper of the clock." Jack may be a shortening of the word Jaccomarchiadus, or man in a suit of armor. Actually the first clocks were made by metal workers and armorers; thus the jacks represented soldiers. By means of secondary controls the jacks rang a bell hourly or in fractions of an hour just as its human counterpart had done. From the fourteenth century onward the jacks became more complex; not only did they announce the time, they evolved into a series of animated vignettes portraying medieval and biblical life.

In the annals of clockwork automata the great Strasbourg Cathedral clock stands as the most elaborate masterpiece of the art form. This construction, several floors high, is not only a clock and many-tiered panoply of automatic pageantry, but it includes many vividly portrayed astronomical functions and an ecclesiastical perpetual calendar. The original clock dates from 1352 and the Schwilgue clock (1842) is a reconstruction with added features. Even now the clock is being rebuilt for a third time.

Actually, there is nothing comparable in our day to this Renaissance universal timepiece. These machines set the living pattern for an entire vicinity. They also acted as vital recorders for every conceivable sacred and secular cycle. By no accident the figure of Death and the stages of human life from infancy to senility became stark motifs used repeatedly to denote the passage of time. The Christian outlook concerning man's duration on earth was that life could be taken away at any moment. Imminent judgment faced the departed. A culture acutely aware of the transient nature of mortality was bound to be impressed by the linear relentlessness of the clock. Being God's timekeeper, the automata clocks repeated cycle after cycle of man's stay upon Earth and, naturally, the cycles of both Earth's and heaven's movements.

More significantly than their religious function, the clocks' automata helped to describe the world in terms of a series of multileveled, interconnected time structures. They gave a sense of orientation to Renaissance man in a way that no other device had ever done before. For the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries these planetary and local timekeepers, with astrolabe, astrological recorder, history index, perpetual calendar, and an allegorical world of mundane and heavenly figures were all the stratifications of theological, philosophical, and scientific thinking compressed into one mechanical, miniature cosmos. For any culture, this represented a monumental concession to technology.

In its day the great clocks, such as the one at Strasbourg, were more than just important scientific instruments; they were mechanical models representing the subtle array of correspondences which stood between the celestial and terrestrial worlds. The great clocks of that age were working models depicting a man-interpreted universe controlled by God. As a picture of the Renaissance time scale they had important implications for future generations of scientists, men who would fit geological durations and organic life spans into a single rational, universal frame of reference. Automata at this point became part of the Age of Reason.

## Mechanistic Aspirations in the Age of Reason

Ample evidence points to the eighteenth century as the golden age of automata. Indicative of the new age of precisionism is the connection between music-box players and the structure of evolving classical musical forms. The morphology of music had several directions: one lay in the expansion of tonal ranges and harmonic intervals; another was generally aimed at symmetry, precision, and clarity of idea. In no marginal way, the music boxes, with their porcelain-faced, silk-clothed figures above and precision-programmed cylinders below, personified the regulated, balanced framework of musical composition. Like perfectly cut crystal, shimmering in completeness, classical musical expression was logically extended, not only through human interpretation, but by the crisp fidelity of the music box.

How close this lay to the prevailing intellectual temper of the day can best be examined by going back to the seventeenth-century rationalistic constructions of Rene Descartes. For all the brilliant, if often wayward, fantasy involved in Descartes's explanations of natural phenomena, he remains the first scientist-philosopher capable of logically circumscribing all the aspects of Nature, sweeping away both the fog of scholasticism and the interventions of a Higher Being, except of course as a prime mover. The subtlety of Descartes's theories of physiology enabled him to establish his own independent existence as a thinking being, along with the existence of God, which decisively cleared the way for rational explanations of the material world.

Of significance are Descartes's mechanical similes to all the animal functions; sleeping, digestion, breathing, heartbeat, formation of ideas and emotion, etc. At times these parallels were grossly unfaithful to the model, similar to comparing a mule to a steam engine because they both could be set to the same task. But in terms of understanding the human optical system, the circulatory system and the nervous system the initial insights are there for the modern physiologist. Humans, according to Descartes, were invested with a soul while animals were not, and in his Discourse on Method he made the supposition that a machine constructed perfectly enough could duplicate any of the lower animals. In contrast, he reasoned, a synthetic man could not be so built. First, because of the powers of speech, and second, because of the ability to reason autonomously, man was beyond the power of the machine makers to recreate. Descartes, it should be remembered, had a theological position to protect. Yet it is interesting that, with the development of the Enlightenment, both speech and the simulation of intelligence became prime goals of the inventors of automata.

The Cartesian concept of mechanism was a very problematic beginning for defining a rationally ordered universe. What gave the idea substance and authority beyond doubt was the Principia (1687) of Newton. In a single intellectual effort many loose bits of scientific conjecture came tied together in one neat package. If a mathematical-mechanical system based on the idea of universal gravitation could explain the orbits of the planets and their satellites, the paths of celestial projectories, the regularity of tides, comets, eclipses and pendulum motion, then what could prevent the inquiring man from understanding all earthly phenomena in terms of a series of mechanical models? The world for all earthly intentions was a great clock, operating cycle after cycle, imperturbably, always in order, and probably never running down. The winder of this clock of course was God, and from this point onward what could be more pious than studying the beauty of God's mechanism?

By the eighteenth century the influence of the mechanistic conception had pervaded every area of thought. Given balanced constitutions and generally elected law-making bodies, men could keep themselves in a constant state of law and order. The arts perfected new degrees of regularity in the extended use of the rhymed couplet and the sonata. John Locke's philosophy and the economics of Adam Smith displayed Newtonian influences in an attempt to set up self-sustaining mechanisms of government and commerce. Though widely divergent, all this had profound implications for the young ladies of the courts of Berlin or Versailles who desired to be amused by the latest mechanical toys.

Before examining a few of these automatic devices, it is well to note that there arose in Descartes's century a new classification of works-nonanthropomorphic and autonomous-which had significance for the later development of automata and, oddly enough, for the sculpture of today.

The dim premonition that a mechanism could have some autonomy over its own actions was sensed by the philosopher Blaise Pascal. His invention (1642) of the arithmetical calculating machine was the forerunner of the modern computer. With its goal of "thinking through" certain types of basic mathematical problems, it possibly represents the first nonanthropomorphic automata. In a sense, while it performed the human act of abstract problem solving, it did so without looking human. What Pascal's calculator simulated to a limited degree was the logic of the Arabic number system. And, though this was not conscious thinking, it was the beginning of the automation of thought processes.

Pascal's work was carried forward in the next century by the philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz. A cogwheel machine by Leibniz not only multiplied, but could be preset to carry out a given program. His intuitive grasp of how the senses function, instead of more scientific cause-effect relationships, has subsequently become important for pattern-recognition techniques in artificial intelligence. With his pioneering work in symbolic logic, Leibniz may deserve designation as the spiritual father of modern cybernetics. Since the work of Pascal and Leibniz, the problem of designing automata, if one discounts industrial machinery, has been divided into two branches: the traditional objective of constructing amusing facsimiles of men and animals; the other, progressively more important for modern automata, the designing of logic systems and programming techniques for the solution of problems put into mathematical form. The implications for both will be set forth in the last chapter of this book.

No better example of an eighteenth-century mechanical genius could be found than Jacques de Vaucanson. Born in Grenoble in 1709, Vaucanson showed an early aptitude for the designing of machinery. Finishing his studies in Lyon, the young inventor went to Paris to perfect himself in the diciplines of anatomy, art, music, and mechanics-seemingly a strange combination, yet one that embodies the talents and flavor of the century.

A statue of The Flutist in the garden of the Tuileries inspired Vaucanson to construct an automaton capable of moving its fingers over the stops of a flute while actually playing tunes. When introducing two other mechanical musicians, the inventor displayed his flutist before the French Academy of Sciences in 1738. The flute player entailed great patience and analytical ability in dissecting all the hand motions and breath control needed for playing the instrument. Vaucanson was even willing to allow an incredulous audience to inspect all the springs and inner movements controlling his piece (this was due more to Vaucanson's pride in his work than to the practices of the day, which sought to maintain anthropomorphic illusionism at all costs). Looking at the diagram provided by Chapuis and Droz from the descriptions by Vaucanson, one must marvel even today at the thoughtful complexity of this realer-than-life construction (1958, p. 276).

Some years before his election to the Academy of Sciences in 1746, Vaucanson's genius was recognized by Cardinal Fleury, who made him the state inspector of silk manufacturing; Vaucanson's lesser-known fame rests on a series of mechanical improvements made in that industry. Later, he was persecuted by the silk weavers in Lyon, who felt that his talent for production efficiency was taking the bread out of their mouths. Aggravated to the point of revenge, Vaucanson threatened to replace the weavers with donkeys. Then he set about perfecting a machine regulated by punch cards which produced flowered silk and was driven by such an animal.

Probably the most famous automaton of all time was Vaucanson's Canard. This animal possessed a fidelity in the imitation of organic functions which surpassed any machine built to that time. Descriptions of the duck give it the ability of moving its body, flexing its wings so that all the feathers work in unison, quacking, drinking water, eating grain, and excreting the results-all in perfect mimicry of the living animal. Situated on a great pedestal housing an imposing mechanism, Vaucanson's creation actually underwent some of the cruder processes of digestion. The Canard was an attempt to produce more than the outward features of an organism. If, like Descartes, Vaucanson applied mechanical principles to the internal organs of the body by crude analogy, at least his was a step in the direction of modern physiological analysis. After Vaucanson's efforts no longer were automata abrupt, uncoordinated, and "mechanical" in their gestures; instead, with the development of coordinated cam systems, smaller flexible spring mechanisms and tiny chain drives, automata assumed the grace of living beings. Records show that Vaucanson was secretly occupied with a project sponsored by Louis XV: the duplication of a complete man with functioning internal organs, including blood circulation. But the King's slowness in paying for the android finally made Vaucanson abandon this work. In all, the making of automata was now a matter of popular technology. If these mechanisms were secular, surely the minds behind them were even more so.

The variety of automata devised in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is only surpassed by the excellent quality of the workmanship involved. Not until the nineteenth century were watches inexpensively mass produced. Before this all mechanisms were precious, and the least utilitarian machines were playthings of the rich. Most treasured were table clocks, mechanical oil paintings, jewelry with automata, snuff boxes, singing birds, and other mechanical toys. By the middle of the nineteenth century inexpensive mechanical toys were produced in large quantities.

## The Sociology of Modern Automata

Certainly the level of genius which went into designing automata in the nineteenth century was considerable. If anything, the entrepreneurs, whose task it was to think up new mechanical novelties for an increasingly jaded public, outdid themselves with the production of chess players, conjurers, singers, and acrobats. The spirit in which these androids were conceived made them inferior to those of the eighteenth century. Consider, for instance, some of the classical Dresden clocks with their displays of mythology, or the small, precious objets d'art by Jaquet-Droz, or the incredibly dainty porcelains mounted on music boxes, all fashioned by the greatest artists of the day. Before the nineteenth century a sympathetic fusion had existed between the mechanical and fine arts. Yet certainly automata made after the eighteenth century had and still have their share of fine artisans, men who take exceptional pride in luxury handicraft-though the breed, as any antique collector knows, is nearly extinct.

A parallel can be drawn between the declining stature of nineteenthcentury automata and rising signs of human alienation. When not used to instill religious awe, automata have often provoked a kind of childlike joy, an elemental delight in the nature of moving objects for their own sake. This delight started to become alien with nineteenth-century sensibilities. In its place arose a modern craving for the impossible. Automata no longer merely danced or played tunes. They were expected to improvise well, win chess games from expert players, or perform feats of magic-in fact, they were presumed, in certain ways, to be the equals of men. An element of despair accompanied these new mechanical writers and calculators. In essence, an undercurrent of the machine's real potential vis-a-vis man was felt for the first time. Perhaps a tinge of bad faith was also involved. Vaucanson's threat to replace skilled silk workers with donkeys formed a sustained nightmare for many craftsmen of the last century.

In the genre of science fiction a recurring theme is the invisible line between humans and pseudo-human androids. A secret delight is attached to guessing if a human actor acting as a mechanical man has not in some unknown way assumed the identity of his role. We experience afrisson when some author convinces us that we would be better off as a race of regulated automata than remaining chaotic humans. The danger is that as the public becomes bored and reconciled to the possibility of an automaton existence it acquiesces to government by technological expediency. This is not to say that society is doomed to mass robotry, but that the first step toward accepting robotic values is appreciating the logic and ease of robot life.

One might ask, how has the robot invaded and replaced human-looking automata? Similar to the androids of previous centuries, the robot is also a mechanical man. Its difference lies in its non-human characteristics, that is a lack of skin coloring, hair, clothing, and natural movements. Rather, the robot is an attempt to produce a mechanical servant in the spirit of the modern, ultra-functional machine.

By the end of the nineteenth century machine designers had decided that machinery was more than period furniture with moving insides. At the time Frank Lloyd Wright spoke out for the use of the machine as a means for design simplification (1960, pp. 55-73). Certainly within Wright's romantic and idealistic philosophy making way for machines was not the same as capitulating to them. In 1908 Adolf Loos wrote Ornament and Crime, while in the same year H. P. Berlage in Basis and Development of Architecture denied the essentiality of decoration and ornament in architecture. A year before, Picasso had painted the first full-fledged Cubist composition, and just five years later Mondrian and Malevich would begin their first purely geometric paintings. All the arts seemed to clamor for a new, nonrepresentational precision, a spiritual cleanliness which would manifest itself in the geo-mechanistic simplicity of the forms used. The feeling spread that man was living with and by machines. If the machine was precise, economical, and geometric in its inner workings, why should the culture that depends on these devices not express this condition externally?

The First World War was a "war of machines," and, as such, brought home the ghastly complications of machines' double-edged nature in a way never before fully appreciated. As an aftermath to the war, plays and stories about "mechanical men" began to appear with some regularity. This was certainly not in the genre of the Gothic horror tale, and Mary Shelley's Frankenstein (1817) is nearly a pastoral devoted to a biological accident, a novel that never anticipated the widespread hopelessness of the new literature. Perhaps the most enduring example of the new vision of automata is Karel Capek's play R.U.R. (1921). The letters stand for "Rossum's Universal Robots" and the play hinges on the old scientist Rossum's discovery of how to fashion artificial beings in human form. Prophetically, Capek realized the many implications of near-human artificial life and how these would eventually affect the race of man. Moreover, through later literature and science, many of the dilemmas which Capek advanced have already begun to have surprising counterparts. Underlying all else in the play is a kind of Faustian fatalism which precludes the exchange of robots for men on this planet. The science popularizer and science-fiction writer Isaac Asimov totally rejects this fatalism as a kind of "Frankenstein complex" (Frankenstein in the sense that tampering with organic creation could have nothing but a tragic end). One of the earliest writers to reflect intelligently on the role of robots, Asimov views these creatures as basically harmless machines which, sensibly enough, should first be programmed not to harm or outwit their creators. According to Asimov, all technology is potentially dangerous, and it is up to the technician or user to control its results, rendering it harmless. Easier said than done. Most specifically, the resulting fear of the mechanical unknown has been burlesqued by the robot-an often threatening creature clad in polished stainless steel, possessing abrupt motorized motions, metallic voice, and flashing lights for eyes.

The term robot, first coined by Capek, comes from the Czech word meaning "forced labor," and implies a lack of autonomy and free will. In Capek's play (Lewis, 1963, p. 13) his robots were not metallic imitations of men but androids, machines constructed to appear human. In a factory these were shaped from materials which could simulate the consistency of the body's organs.

Gradually Capek's original conception of the word robot has undergone debasement until it implies either a fearsome, cartoon-style, clanking mechanical man, or a person who insensitively follows orders with rigid efficiency regardless of their implications. Both in their own way are fearsome prospects, hostile to some of the most valuable human qualities. With slivers of irony, Capek touches upon the second popular meaning, which directly implies the totalitarian mentality, and indirectly an attitude of alienation where machines prevail, producing a decay of social, moral, and vocational ideals. In spite of these serious implications, the electromechanical robots have produced a kind of Disney-like folklore for the automatic age.

As motion pictures were perfected, a new type of human image far surpassed the mechanical automata. The automata had had their day; they became museum curiosities. The public adopted a common-sense attitude toward the mechanized task. Machines normal; they should look like

were machines, doing no more and meaning no more than their function prescribed. There was no outward mystery about the new breed of industrial automata; people not only expected them to work like machines, but thought of them as complicated extensions of the many electrical utilities in use daily. No longer the brain children of lonely inventors or side-show entrepreneurs, industrially produced robots were the advertising creations oflarge electrical-appliance corporations-to be demonstrated at stores, trade fairs, and conventions.

Such a robot, described by the historian of dolls, Max von Boehn, was used at a London model engine exhibition in 1928 to give the opening address. It walked to the speaker's platform, where it addressed the audience in a loud clear voice, referring to the many displays as a preview of the future of engineering. A similar robot, displayed in London in 1932, looked very much like a medieval knight in full armor except for a cylindrical head mounted with acoustical pickups and light-sensitive resistors. In the 1930's the differences between unconscious automata and automata considered to possess some degree of consciousness became apparent. Engineers no longer felt satisfied to create the illusion of a "seeing" robot; but in the sense that it did respond to a given stimulus, a light beam, it did "see." The Westinghouse Company used the new development of sound film for their talking robot, "Televox." The names of other such creatures, "Electro, the Man of Steel," "Vocalite," "Monsurus," and "Sabor" suggest a certain lack of aesthetic sensitivity in their creators, and an attempt to provoke an aura of monstrous other-worldliness. These steel-clad machines with electrodes projecting from their temples, are pathetic titans, more helpless and powerful than any human being. Science fiction abounds with humans who eventually penetrate the outer casings of their robot enemies, revealing their internal organs, smashing diodes and ripping out intricate wiring by the handful.

Since the war, a new sort of apparatus has followed on the heels of the cumbersome machine man. For too long the robot personified a Luddite fear of the conscious machine without ever really being conscious. After 1945 experimental research in man-machine relationships was coordinated under the title of cybernetics, resulting in electronic pseudo-organisms quite unlike robots in appearance. Grey Walter's "tortoises," Ross Ashby's "homeostat," the maze-running "mice" of Claude Shannon are all attempts by scientists to construct paradigms of organic behavior; these are not clever copies of flute playing or poetry writing, but working models, generally analogues of various aspects of the nervous system found in simple organisms. These pseudo-organisms constructed by psychologists, neuro-physiologists, and communication engineers are, in conception and intention, far more sophisticated than all automata preceding them; no longer complex mechanical toys, they are tenuously linked with life itself.

The theory of automata-which has nothing to do with mechanical men -has become one of the most fascinating and vital branches of communication and cybernetic study. From the visual standpoint, the English writer P. E. Cleator recalls that, just as the first automobiles looked like and were called "horseless carriages," the first industrially devised robots were clumsy caricatures of the human form; hence there is no reason why the coming generation of industrial robots should resemble men. Already "power amplifiers" have been designed that are electronically sensitive to neural-muscular activity. These "power amplifiers" look nothing like human beings but enable a man to perform the work of ten or twenty men. Like the factory machines of the nineteenth century, the new adaptive, complex, role-playing automata will be regarded as machines, first and foremost, with no attempt to preserve anthropomorphic appearances. A glance at any pictorial history of machines shows that whenever a new machine is invented to replace either an older machine or an animal the tendency is to preserve the appearances of the obsolete object: hence there were "clock watchers" that struck the time, steamboats with sails, and trains that looked like stagecoaches.

As sociology and psychology analyze the viciousness of alienation toward work, literature grows on the phenomena of human beings gearing, or refusing to gear, themselves to the rhythm and communication style of machines. In terms of interaction and sensitivity to human needs, a machine may be more effective than another person. Witness the situation in which teaching machines are so hotly debated. In the long run machines may win out because it is cheaper and more efficient to mass produce teaching machines with effective programs than to train sufficient quantities of good teachers.

In a gentler vein, we have come fa Disney to regard the robot almost as a house pet (in derision we may refer to someone with a strong sense of loyalty to his organization as a "cheerful robot"). Some relatively inexpensive children's robot toys use feedback principles that are just out of the design-research department. Antonioni, the director whose movies personify modern purposelessness and ennui, has used automata powerfully. In The Red Desert (1964) an opening scene shows a series of lingering shots of a nursery. Against the soft shadows of the room a repetitious mechanical sound can be heard. It stops and starts, stops and starts. Finally we see a small battery-powered toy robot; it repeatedly drives into a wall, stops, then backs up and turns, only to crash into the wall again.

One of the most pathetic cases of machine behavior has been recorded by Bruno Bettelheim in his essay "Joey, the Mechanical Boy" (Josephson, pp. 437-446). This is a study of a nine-year-old who believed himself a machine, rid of the humanity which he finds unbearable. Bettelheim first reminds us that there is something innately fascinating and frightening about a machine turned human-but still more ghastly is the human who finds security in actually becoming a robot.

The acting out of Joey's machine existence was so emotionally intense and thorough that even the attendants and nurses in the school for the mentally disturbed where he stayed had a difficult time remembering that this thin little boy was not a machine. For long periods his "machinery" might not "work" and he would sit stark, rigidly still. Or perhaps his machinery would idle, and he would make low, gentle noises, rhythmically rocking back and forth. Other times he would shift gears toward a higher speed, until shouts of "crash, crash!" would warn all nearby that the mechanism was out of control. Radio tubes, bits of machinery or stray objects would be hurled by the child, signifying the final breakdown of the machine. Joey plugged himself in to run his eating apparatus. At night "machinery" made of wire, masking tape, cardboard, and other bits of material had to be reassembled next to his bed so that it could "live" him, keeping him running during sleep. Awake, all of Joey's human functions and interests were guided by practical necessities of maintaining the machine. When he was engaged in play, the machine would be "turned off." He demonstrated the frailty of his body by hurting himself on a jungle gym, thereby showing the superiority of machines over humans: " ... they don't break; they're much harder and stronger."

Bettelheim recounts the first painful steps of Joey trying to enter the human world from that of machines. Joey's condition was the result of an extreme reaction to parental rejection, and his recovery meant regaining the ability to trust people around him. Bettelheim observes that probably only in our time and culture could such a situation have arisen. As machines, with enormous commercial sponsorship and methods of enticement, become the accepted surrogate for human attention and affection, what better escape route is there for the unprotected?

## Subsculpture in Modern Art

The theme of the pseudo-man, as manikin or robot, became a central issue of art after 1910, but not until the next decade did it dominate the subject matter for anyone artist. An early forerunner in the use of this theme, Giovanni Battista Bracelli in 1624 began a series of Bizarreries or mechanical men in the mode of Analytical Cubism. Not until 1910 when Cubism became firmly established in Paris was there any acceptance of mechanized anatomy, and very soon this kind of geometricism became the lever for graphic criticism of the automobile era.

As for Cubism, its development and popularity among artists have been much explained. They grow out of an increasing sense of urban dynamism and the inability of the painter to register the relativity of object-observer movements with the traditional tools of representation. Similarly, the relativity of space and objects could not be captured with the Impressionist's optical breakdown of light and color; the same was true for the Fauvist magnification of color relationships. The need was for a new form of analysis serially depicting multiple views of a set of objects. The basis for this lies in Cezanne's approaches to fragmented and simplified modeling. Broken planes resulting from this treatment gradually assumed a separate life and, rather than the subject matter, they became the structural basis of Cubist painting. In the hands of Picasso and Braque this treatment of subject and space tended toward depth ambiguity, monochromatization, and multi-view images.

Picasso's few early Cubist sculptures are less spatial explorations than elucidations to his painting problems. As for plane geometry, its loose employment by Cubist painters was a semi-intentional gesture (vaguely that of analyzing), rather than an end in itself. Nevertheless, Cubist sculpture owes a considerable debt to Cubist painting; most of its plastic devices are founded on the discoveries of painters. One exception is the early sculpture of the Russian emigre to Paris Alexander Archipenko. Probably Archipenko has some justification in proclaiming himself the prime innovator of modern sculpture. Much of the vocabulary of modern sculpture first appeared in his work between 1910 and 1920. Paris then was such a hotbed of avant-garde eclecticism that works were copied in principle even before they found their way out of the studio. As yet, no full and fair assessment of Archipenko's sculpture has ever been made.

Much of Archipenko's talent stemmed from his father, an inventor and mechanical engineer in the city of Kiev. Early in his education the sculptor sensed a strong affinity between mathematics and art, in itself not unusual for an artist, but in Archipenko's case the inventive and analytical portion of his mind often outstripped the ability to unify discoveries into a body of

76. Alexander Archipenko, Medrano I

(Juggler), 1912. works of consistent artistic merit. For most artists, later work is a refinement of earlier ideas, but in Archipenko's case refinement meant weakened contours and a barrage of unfortunate materials and color choices. The irony of Archipenko's efforts lies in the disparity of its quality. If we were carefully to pick fifty pieces from his output of over a thousand works, he unquestionably would stand as one of the seminal masters of our century; on the other hand, another choice of fifty of the worst sculptures puts him in a category with industrial designers producing lamp bases and knick-knack ceramics of the most banal taste.

Part of Archipenko's greatness, as he insisted, was that his early sculptures were not based primarily on Cubist painting but upon his investigation of geometric relationships. Thus many of his innovations look clumsy in their first stages because of his concern for formalism and use of material. Aesthetic propriety became a subs.equent consideration. No work demonstrates this more graphically than Medrano I (Juggler) (FIG. 76). Archipenko claims this as the first three-dimensional construction; if not, it certainly is one of the earliest.

Altogether, Medrano I represents a strange assembly of anatomical dislocations which statically portray bodily movements rather than the body itself. Constructed of wood, sheet metal, wire, and glass, it may be the first intimation of the modern robot in art. The head, parts of the trunk and some of the limbs are curved metal forms; the knees represent mechanical joints while the right arm actually moves from the shoulder. A wire form at neck level symbolizes the trajectory of body movement. Archipenko's anticipation of kinetic sculpture is further shown by a series of disks in Medrano I tracing a path of movement. His use of mixed media for constructed sculptures was limited until about 1920, when reflective metals in various textures and colors precipitated the trend toward polychrome sculpture. Doubtless these early sheet-metal constructions made an impression on the Russian Constructivists 77).

Before reviewing the mechanistic tendencies of other sculptors under the Cubist influence, it would help to clarify Archipenko's relation to Cubism. Whatever validity his statements have in regard to his independence from Cubism, it would have been hard for any artist then working in Paris to stay aloof from ideas which were common currency. The Section d'Or group considered higher mathematics and the vocabulary of machine images to be "in." However, Archipenko did produce an anthropomorphic idiom of metallic, geometrical forms which expressly moved beyond the needs of Cubism and became both the basis of the first anthropomorphic images of Constructivism, and the industrial designer's conception of the modern robot. Moreover, Archipenko never discouraged critics and art historians from seeing parallels between his work and the developments of modern science.

Most other admittedly Cubist sculptors remain on the periphery of the mechanized man theme. Raymond Duchamp-Villon's Great Horse (FIG. 78) nearly submerges the recognizable animal into an aggregate of compact forms of organic and mechanical parts. The simplifications of his Seated Woman (1914), its faceless head and mechanical knee-joint insertions, suggest a manikin more than anatomical improvisation.

Jacques Lipchitz eschewed the mechanistic propensities of his Cubist friends. One of the ironies of Lipchitz is that much of his finest work, the severe, linear, Cubist sculpture of 1914 to 1920, runs completely counter to his natural inclination for baroque globosity. His rectilinear Cubism (FIG. 79) derives from a three-dimensional adaptation of the collage Cubism of Picasso and Braque. In no way does this detract from its being one of the finest products of Cubist thought, yet it does imply a direct contrast between Archipenko and Lipchitz. Archipenko produced sculpture for the sake of experimentation, often at the expense of art; a careful sensitivity toward 78. Raymond Duchamp-Villon, The Great Horse, 1914. 77. Antoine Pevsner, Torso, 1924-1926. 79. Jacques Lipchitz, Man with Mandolin, 1917. Yale University Art Gallery. Gift of the Societe Anonyme.

~,~ 80. Fernand Leger, The Card Players, 1917. avant-garde vogue and a need to make, above all else, "Art," led Lipchitz into safer waters.

The robot made its full-dress appearance in Cubist painting. During a two-year period before his first nonobjective drawings, Kasimir Malevich composed Cubist paintings with metallic cylindrical figures-to some extent the result of Rayonnist painting theories in Russia. Fernand Leger explored a related style, in France, during the same years before the First World War. The feeling for machine forms was undoubtedly there as attested by Leger's observation that the sight of a gleaming cannon barrel changed his outlook on painting thereafterward.

Leger's painting The Card Players 80) most precisely defines the

(FIG. robot in its modern form; the figures are drawn as polished tubular men. The entire picture makes a multifaceted display of cylindrical steel surfaces; all hints of organic matter have been omitted. In the 1920's Leger redefined his mechanical world to include not only cams, valves, conduits, and steel structures, but a number of objects, organic and household, which do not fit precisely into the industrial landscape. This is reinforced by his film Ballet Mecanique (1923), which through montage executes a symphony of parallels between everyday human activity and the rhythmic drive of the machine in overlapping proximity. Leger's pose was that of uncomplicated survival in an age of machine values, rather than the intellectual's ironic resignation.

Certainly this last could not be said for the pseudo-machine creations of Francis Picabia and Marcel Duchamp. The second decade of the twentieth century was the period in which the machine overtly entered the iconography of art. It seemed hard to believe, mentions Mme. Buffet-Picabia (Motherwell, 1951, p. 257), that artists had turned their back for so long on the presence of the machine, as if they had some secret pact with the muses to deny its existence. Almost until Delaunay's use of the motif, the Eiffel Tower remained a source of derision for even the avant-garde of Paris. Moreover, Picabia laid bare psychical hostilities toward the machine age. He implied that because the artist uses the machine does not mean that he sympathizes with the value system which it tacitly erects. In an oblique manner Picabia suggested a certain merging of interests and physical characteristics between machines and future human beings. The essence of this can be found in his Portrait of a Young Girl in a State of Nudity (1915), an enlarged, proto-pop, commercial line drawing of a spark plug with the inscription

"FOR EVER." Occasionally this drawing also appears as The American Girl, pointing out, rightly enough, that America represented the fountainhead of pragmatism and the mechanistic rationale. More obscure, and more subtle, are the dozens of drawings and gouache paintings devoted to improbably coupled machines. These Rube Goldberg creations with their punning nomenclature are not definable as robot humans so much as organizational diagrams for social and interpersonal relationships. Picabia, long before other artists, realized that the higher power of the machine lay in its ability to be united with other machines into feeling relationships, and to assume some of the social interaction of organisms living together.

As a painter Giorgio de Chirico stands by himself, the fabricator of a private imagery classified as a forerunner of Surrealism. About 1914 his arid cityscapes were succeeded by groups of manikins, often partially dismembered and faceless like dressmakers' dummies, strangely human in their gestures, and placed among buildings. It is a credit to the painter's poetry that these stuffed and sewn men seem more at home in their environment of sun-bleached buildings and arcades than were the robot figures of the Cubists. Robots are robots-they lack focus and subjectivity.

The art historian James Thrall Soby submits the possibility that a play, Les chants de la mi-mort, the concoction of de Chirico's brother, gave the artist the idea for his invention of metaphysical actors. The voiceless and faceless hero of Les chants de la mi-mort seems a perfect foil for the painter's settings, where all drama is performed with an exactitude of silence and gesture. Often de Chirico's manikins give hints of either mechanical or organic insides; their torsos sometimes merge with almost human limbs or their pelvises sprout from stone columns. Rather maddening is all this symbolism out in the clear Italian sunlight. The inferences are there to be read, but somehow the situation remains eternally vague.

A common stereotype of the Bauhaus depicts it as a gleaming workshop which produced tubular furniture, gas-pipe lettering, and highly geometrical silverware. In truth the most ardently romantic and informal sensibilities continually clashed with this kind of formalistic utilitarianism. This image of the Bauhaus is due to the selectivity and preferences of the people who have written books about it. That Oskar Schlemmer was one of these romantics can never be said. No other Bauhaus theorist, not even Moholy-Nagy, was as acutely cognizant of the limitations and potentials of the totally mechanized stage, nor did anyone desire to create such a stage more than Schlemmer. Schlemmer's stage in theory can be envisioned as a kind of metaphysical microcosm that attempts to reflect the psychic evolution of man. One of his more specific theories deals with the theatre as an organism (or complete mechanism) capable of engulfing the audience, thereby becoming the means for the total preoccupation of man's sensory equipment, Schlemmer's virtual "feast for the eyes."

Long before the present generation of Kinetic artists, Schlemmer uncovered a major doubt which has beset every designer desiring to invent an "art of movement" by mechanical means-the problem of keeping such an operation from becoming routine and boring. In his notes for the Bauhaus stage Schlemmer reminds the reader that he is not speaking of the automatic control panel, which has become a progressive reality in the past forty years, but the possibility of pseudo-actors or mobile machines capable of conveying their messages through light, electronic music, and the mechanical equivalents of dance. Sadly and realistically he realizes the limitations of mechanical kinematic motion-except as an instrument of human parody (in his diary he cites the greatness of Chaplin, as the movie actor juxtaposed the consummate unnaturalness of the machine with his own artistic perfection). Schlemmer was one of the first modern artists to recognize the interlocking triangle which exists between the artist's urge to produce an autonomous mechanical fine art, the limited public appeal for such an expensive undertaking, and the financial interests, who see little profit or ideological purpose from such a venture.

How in practical terms did the automaton enter Schlemmer's conception of the stage? As with artists before, Schlemmer was stimulated by literary precedents which accepted the mechanical person as potentially superior to the human being. He also understood the implications for control and freedom as manifested between operator and puppet in Heinrich von Kleist's essay "Uber das Marionettentheater." Schlemmer was keenly aware of its Faustian implications: first, the ability of perfected mechanical performers to transcend human capabilities (he uses, as an example, freedom from gravity, thinking mainly in terms of dance), and secondly, the attendant dangers for man of such power uncontrolled. Certainly the second consideration remains fairly hazy and his uppermost feeling is expressed when he writes in his diary (1958, p. 199): "Not distress over mechanization, but gladness for precision. "

Of the absolute visual stage he writes (1957, p. 22): "Man, the animated being, would be banned from view in this mechanistic organism. He would stand as 'the perfect engineer' at the central switch-board, from where he would direct this feast for the eyes."

Schlemmer obviously envisioned his optimum stage as a sort of giant organism, with man, the spectator nested in its bowels, getting his sensory fill while standing outside directing the feast. Of course, today, when automatic preset lighting consoles are a fairly common part of the theatre, there is relatively little reason why even control should be a human matter.

The fact that building robots flexible enough for the stage was an impossibility left Schlemmer with the alternative of designing stylized robot and geometric costumes for his human dancers. These costumes, and often constructions is a better word, were derived from a number of sources-the masks of the Classical Greek theatre, the sculpture of Archipenko, the stuffed figures of de Chirico, the medieval knight in full armor, the machine and mechanical doll. Schlemmer directed the dancer toward an awareness of his body as a machine producing patterns of motion expressly designed to intersect and fill the plenum of the stage space. As in machine design, the dancer, rather than being an actor in a choreographic routine, plotted a precise series of kinematic sequences. According to costume and assigned function, each dancer was wedded to certain "laws" of motion and spatial attack-like a piece on a chessboard.

In the area of static sculpture Schlemmer's output gives only a slight indication of his obsession for animated form. Compared with his painting and reliefs, his sculpture production remains rather slight. Abstract Figure (FIG. 81) exemplifies whatever progress Schlemmer did make. Its masses undoubtedly owe something to Archipenko, especially the Russian's discovery of the interchangeability of negative and positive (concave and convex) contours. More nearly unique is Schlemmer's handling of the penetration of forms in a manner reminiscent of the way modern machine designers began to assemble the cowlings which housed the various parts of machines. They only hinted at what was happening under the metal covering. The asymmetry

81. Oskar Schlemmer, Abstract Figure, 1921. of Abstract Figure owes more to Schlemmer's curious conception of how the body invades space and is shown in cutaway fashion than to any natural pose. In fact, Schlemmer found his real medium for sculpture only when he was able to create choreography and costumes for his dancers.

With scant exception before the late 1950's, the demarcation line between sculpture and all other forms of anthropomorphic imagery remained intact. If primitive fetish images inspired the Cubists and robot sculpture found its stimulus in the machine, in all, sculpture remained sculpture and outside influences were assimilated into the art without destroying the chain of tradition. Except for the theorizing of a handful of Dadaists and Surrealists, very few artists contemplated producing a "fine art" exclusively from the domain of fetishes, automata, dolls, or other subsculptural forms. The dignity of the base, compositional considerations, the tradition of permanent materials: all conspired to prevent something as trifling as a wind-up doll from consideration as an art object. However, in German-speaking countries during the First World War there was a great vogue for puppetry; this pastime, as for instance in the geometric marionettes of Sophie Taeuber-Arp, became the springboard for several postwar experiments of the Dadaists.

Oskar Kokoschka's fetish, a doll which he lovingly planned in his letters to its maker in Stuttgart, is probably the most famous instance of an artist developing a passion for an ideal woman constructed of cloth and wood. The doll had to have certain tactile qualities besides specified visual charms. With its final arrival at Kokoschka's studio early in 1919, it proved to be a monster: the sum total of the painter's dreams, lifelike, but grotesque in its lack of animation. It was buried after a mock murder, then later unearthed. Kokoschka was reported to have escorted the doll on occasion to the opera in Dresden.

The German Surrealist Hans Bellmer has built his life around the evocative qualities of the doll. The crude vitality of some long-forgotten childhood toys awoke Bellmer to the realization that both his life as an advertising executive and his attempts at art were more pose than not. Bellmer, like Schlemmer, felt influenced by the phantasy of mechanical life. The beautiful automaton Olympia in The Tales of Hoffman excited the artist into creating his own manipulable dummies. Where Schlemmer chose costumed actors, Bellmer built and dissected his own doll anatomies-mechanical yet appearing softly human.

The first version of Bellmer's doll appears skeletal, a skull and torso structure with broomstick limbs and metallic joints. Soon he enhanced The Doll (1934) with flesh and skin in the manner of a little girl's doll; only Bellmer reassembled these legs, torso, and hands into suggestive combinations. Posed to tease, it explores, in compliment to Freud's mental unconscious, the physical unconscious. In its more grotesque and erotic forms The Doll becomes the plaything of a "Peeping Tom" or voyeur, twisted about

In with false hair and clothing, half coy Lolita. its most analytical form "She" is spread out on a blanket, totally dismembered, like the components of a weapon during military field inspection. In later versions he made his own humanoid creations, all legs or oval anatomical forms fastened together. Bellmer literally sundered the corporeality of his female dummy, penetrating the psyche that lay within the cavity of its wooden frame.

The doll, the manikin, and the robot precariously began to find their place in the fine arts. However, another artist must be considered because of his profound insight into the man-machine relationship. Marcel Duchamp's metamorphosis as an artist concerned with facts of machine life cannot be described here, except to say that no work in our century better crystallizes the themes of alienation (environmental, vocational, male-female), than his The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even (FIG. 82), known also as The Large Glass. The Large Glass has an overwhelmingly complex iconography which can only be touched upon in reference to the "Nine Malic Molds," those images inhabiting a section of the lower, or male portion of the Glass. The "Malic Molds" appear to be metallic hooded forms, almost robotic, resembling a cross between the hoods of automobiles and the pieces of a chessboard-the last, of course, being quite likely in the light of Duchamp's preoccupation with the game. In The Green Box (1960), Duchamp's collection of notes for The Large Glass, he identifies each of the molds by occupation: gendarme, cuirassier, delivery boy, busboy, priest, policeman, undertaker's mute, flunkey, and station master-all male, uniformed types in good standing, solid citizens who are actually hollow containers for the Bride's lighting gas.

defining the shallow and self-deluding role of the "Malic Molds"

In Duchamp, as Lebel comments, makes one of his few unhappy observations concerning the meaning of the work. He drops his guise as cheerful meta-ironist to hint at the essential servility of the male types portrayed. It should be remembered that Duchamp, obsessed with the need for his own personal freedom, has scant respect for the psychic subordination of most practicing artists, and even less for that of the man in the street. By envisioning his fellow men as a body of unthinking, unfeeling functionaries in the power structure, Duchamp only modernized a sensibility which Charles Baudelaire expressed three-quarters of a century earlier. The poet, in his essay on "The Salon of 1846," gave his views on the possibilities and debilities of heroicism in modern life by comparing sartorial modes (1955, p. 128): Is it not the necessary garb of our suffering age, which wears the symbol of a perpetual mourning even upon its thin black shoulders? Note, too, that the dress-coat and the frock-coat not only possess their political beauty, which is an expression of universal equality, but also their poetic beauty, which is an expression of the public soul-an immense cortege of undertakers' mutes (mutes in love, political mutes, bourgeois mutes ... ). We are each of us celebrating some funeral. A uniform livery of affliction bears witness to equality; and as for the eccentrics, whose violent and contrasting colours used easily to betray them to the eye, today they are satisfied with slight nuances in design in cut, much more than in colour.

Baudelaire's comments, of course, referred to the use of dark colors for men's clothing. These had been in the process of becoming standard business wearing apparel since the 1830's. France then there was talk that continual

In wearing of dark clothing endangered health, and that such clothing also represented the soul-deadening invasion of English styles and ideas. Baudelaire noted the lack of individualism in dress, especially in colors, and implied that this was only symptomatic of a greater malignancy: this universal business uniform that withstood only minor variations so as to signal the status of each man. Parallel is a note from Duchamp's The Green Box which reads 82. Marcel Ducharnp, The Large Glass ("Nine Malic Molds,"

lower left center), 1915-1923. (1960, no page number): "'-Provisional color The malic forms. They are

= provisionally painted with red lead while waiting for each one to receive its color, like croquet mallets."

Alluding to the small colored bands that make a set of croquet mallets distinctive, Duchamp also refers to the standard coating of red lead applied to metallic surfaces to prevent corrosion. Thus the connection between the poet and artist is clear: if the dark business suit is a badge of conformity for Baudelaire, then the metallic robot uniform seized upon by Duchamp only helps to show the critical nature of the situation less than a century later.
