---
book: "The Dream Machine: J.C.R. Licklider and the Revolution That Made Computing Personal"
author: "M. Mitchell Waldrop"
part: "The Phenomena Surrounding Computers"
source_pages: "196–258"
type: source
---

# The Phenomena Surrounding Computers

In the early hours of October 5, 1957, local time, an R-7 intercontinental ballistic missile lifted off from the Soviet Union’s top-secret launch complex at Baikonur, in Kazakhstan, and arced eastward into the predawn darkness over central Asia. The R-7 was an ungainly, utilitarian vehicle, with four outward angling first-stage engines that made it look a bit like a corn silo wearing a skirt. More to the point, it was still experimental. The engineers who witnessed its ascent were rolling the dice: they had spent the previous spring watching test flights end explosively; their two lone successes had come only that August. Still, the go-ahead for this attempt had been given by the Kremlin itself. And indeed, the engineers were lucky once again. Less than half an hour after launch, at an altitude of some 141 miles, the R-7 released its payload.

The payload didn’t look like much, either: just a 184-pound aluminum sphere, twenty-three inches across, trailing four long antennae. But then, humankind’s first artificial satellite was fairly simple even by 1957 standards. It did contain instruments to measure cosmic rays, meteoroids, and conditions in the extreme upper reaches of the atmosphere. But mainly it sust signaled its continued existence via two radio transmitters that went beep—beep—beep ad nauseam. The hopelessly unfashionable bureaucrat: Lick ca. 1962 To American ears, even its name sounded silly: Sputnik Zemlt, Russian for “little traveling companion of the world.”

Except that no one in the United States was laughing: the launch of Sputnik rocked the nation like no event since Pearl Harbor. As one account of the early space race put it, “|Sputnik’s| two transmitters would fail twenty-three days after launch—but their arrogant beeping would continue to sound in the American memory for years to come.... Gone forever in this country was the myth of American superiority in all things technical and scientific.”! The Russians weren’t just playing catch-up anymore, as they had with Joe One, their first atomic-bomb test, back in August 1949. With Sputnik they seemed to have passed the United States: their rockets worked, while ours were still blowing up on the launch pad. Moreover, the real import was lost on no one. A rocket that could put an inane silver beachball into orbit was also a rocket that could lob an atomic bomb into New York, Washington, Chicago, Los Angeles—anywhere. “Mankind,” intoned a Rockefeller Foundation panel headed by the young Harvard historian Henry Kissinger, “is faced by two somber threats: the Communist thrust to achieve world domination that seeks to exploit all dissatisfactions and to magnify all tensions; and the new weapons technology capable of obliterating civilization.”

On November 3, as if to drive the point home, the Soviet missile wizards launched the 1,120-pound biomedical satellite Sputnik IT, carrying a Border collie named Laika. (After four days she was automatically put to sleep—peacefully, one hopes—by lethal injection.) And on May 15, 1958, the Baikonur team would triumph yet again, with the seven-thousand-pound Sputnik III. But by that point its success would be almost redundant: the American public had long since gone into a media-driven orgy of finger pointing and self-flagellation. The banner of Marx and Lenin was on the advance in every corner of the globe, it seemed, while the faltering, ineffectual West was advancing only toward the dustbin. Magazines featured admiring articles about the harshly disciplined Soviet classrooms, so different from our own indulgent schools and so effective at mass-producing Soviet engineers by the tens of thousands for the dawning age of technocracy. Politicians of both parties spoke ominously of a “missile gap”— among them the junior senator from Massachusetts, an affable and ambitious young man named John Fitzgerald Kennedy. And President Dwight David Eisenhower was widely portrayed as the perfect emblem of our decline: the Hero of Normandy and Conqueror of the Third Reich had become a tired, indecisive, confused old man who was totally out of touch with the Space Age.

In the White House, meanwhile, the Hero of Normandy was privately exasperated with all this carrying-on. Eisenhower knew the missile gap was bogus (as did many of the politicians bemoaning it). He had approved the development of ICBMs as far back as 1954; the U.S. rockets now being tested would be far more sophisticated than their clumsy Soviet counterparts. However, he also had to admit that the U.S. military had been entirely too willing to coast along on the technological triumphs of World War IT. We hadn’t fallen behind yet, public hysteria to the contrary, but unless we acted quickly, we might very well do so in another ten years, or twenty. Moreover, the disarray in the U.S. space program was all too real, with three warring fiefdoms-—the army, navy, and air force—developing missiles and applications almost independently of one another.

So on November 7, 1957, in a solemn address to the nation, Eisenhower announced that he was appointing the president of MIT, James Killian, to the newly created post of presidential science adviser, thereby moving science and technology to the center of U.S. policymaking. He likewise committed his administration to massive new investments in education, research, and development. And in the process, he promised, he was going to clean up the research mess in the Pentagon. A short time later, Eisenhower followed up on that pledge by endorsing a plan to consolidate all the Pentagon’s space research under a new civilian agency reporting directly to the secretary of defense. It would be called the Advanced Research Projects Agency, or ARPA.

Well, it was a nice try. True, Eisenhower’s research and education initiatives marked the beginning of what participants now remember wistfully as the golden age of R&D in the United States—a multibillion-dollar funding boom that would dwarf the Manhattan Project, the Rad Lab, and all the other World War II efforts put together. For the better part of a decade, until the good times were brought to an end by the escalating cost of Vietnam, science education would flourish as never before, from kindergarten to graduate school. Basic research would do likewise, in fields ranging from cell biology to particle physics. And the rising tide of cash would elevate whole new industries, not the least of which was an exotic new electronics technology known as semiconductors.

Back at the Pentagon, however, the services and the Joint Chiefs of Staff regarded this upstart ARPA as a competitor for funds and a rival for the attention of the secretary, the president, and Congress. By the time the agency opened for business, in February 1958, they had already begun their counterattack. And when the dust settled that fall, all of ARPA’s nonmilitary space projects had been spun off to a new civilian agency called the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, or NASA. Most of the military space efforts, meanwhile, had reverted to the services. And ARPA found itself reporting not to the secretary of defense but to the director of defense research and engineering (DDR&E), a newly created deputy secretary responsible for coordinating defense R&D across the board. All the fledgling agency had left was a handful of really advanced programs such as ballistic missile defense, nuclear-test detection, and materials science—the kind of beyond-the-cutting-edge stuff that the services were willing to do without.

Still, ARPA did survive, and by January 1961, when the junior senator from Massachusetts was inaugurated as Eisenhower’s successor, it had even attained a measure of grudging acceptance. When an air force undersecretary named Jack Ruina took over that same month as ARPA’s new director, he discovered that he actually rated a government car and driver, plus a Pentagon office suite furnished with a flag and wall-to-wall carpeting. Better still, his suite lay in the coveted E Ring of offices along the outside of the building, which meant that he had the rare privilege of looking out his window into the real world (lesser mortals assigned to the inner A, B, C, and D rings saw nothing but other windows). Indeed, Ruina was on the same third floor as the new secretary of defense himself, Robert McNamara. Nevertheless, Ruina couldn’t help but notice that the intensely rank-conscious culture of the Pentagon had calibrated his status to the millimeter. His government car had a dent, and his office was more than a third of the way around the ring from McNamara’s, which would make for a long, rank-reducing walk should he ever be called into the secretary’s presence.

But so what? The Polish-born, Brooklyn-raised electrical engineer was much more concerned about his top priority, which was to remake his agency from the ground up. His predecessors had done their best, but the fact remained that ARPA had survived by being a grab bag of leftover programs. And now that the arms race had most definitely become a technology race, Ruina was convinced that ARPA had to have much more focus, direction, and purpose. Most of all, it had to become a force for technical excellence. It had to fund research of the very highest quality, whether or not that research was what the services thought they needed for immediate military applications. It had to be staffed with program managers who knew the science and the technology thoroughly. And instead of being subjected to endless review and micromanagement, those managers had to be given autonomy, authority, and the freedom to act. Assault the technological frontiers everywhere you can, Ruina urged them. Go out to the university labs, the national labs, the private sector, anywhere. Look for people with ideas that push the envelope. Give them development money. Be generous. Take risks. Cut through the red tape. Do whatever you have to. But do it.

This free-wheeling “ARPA style” of management was radical for 1961, and nothing like the rigidly top-down hierarchy that prevailed elsewhere in the Pentagon. But it worked. Old Washington hands who transferred into the agency could only shake their heads in disbelief: decisions that would take months anywhere else were made at ARPA in a matter of days. You might see Ruina and his program directors brainstorming an idea one morning and then by four the next afternoon hear secretaries typing out letters for contractors to start work.

Not surprisingly, such energy got noticed, especially in a brand-new administration that had pledged to reinvigorate the military. Ruina’s approach fitted right in with John F. Kennedy’s New Frontier activism. Moreover, ARPA’s largest research programs—ballistic-missile defense and nuclear-test detection—had already emerged as what Ruina liked to call presidential issues: the kinds of subjects a secretary of defense might want to talk about when he met face to face with the commander in chief. So in practice, says Ruina, he found himself taking that long, long walk around the Pentagon periphery fairly often. Robert McNamara’s appetite for facts and figures was legendary; he wanted to know exactly what was going on in these areas.

Still, says Ruina, astonishing though it may seem in retrospect, there was one technology that the secretary never asked him about: computing. Why should he? ARPA wasn’t funding any computer research. And besides, as far as McNamara or almost anyone else on the third-floor E Ring knew, computers were just gadgets to be used for payroll and accounting, plus a few very exotic applications such as the SAGE air-defense system. True, some people down at the working level of the DoD were trying to think more creatively about computers. But they certainly hadn’t come up with anything that Ruina found compelling. “People saw that something was there,” he says, “but they were not prepared to invest big money without knowing quite what that something was.”

All of which explains why ARPA ended up getting into computer research backward, Ruina says, thanks to a kind of bureaucratic triple conjunction. First came the White Elephants: four surplus computers that had originally been built as spares for the air force’s SAGE program. These “Q-32” machines were each the size of a small house and were utterly useless for anything other than air defense, unless they underwent a top-to-bottom reprogramming. But because they had been so fabulously expensive, no sane bureaucrat would dare throw them away. So they landed in the office of the DDR&E, along with a directive: Do something with these things.

Second, there was the Orphan: SDC, the Systems Development Corporation of Santa Monica, the RAND spin-off that had written the software and done the operator training for SAGE. The company was facing severe cutbacks and layoffs now that SAGE was nearing completion. And the air force, anxious to keep the team intact, was lobbying hard: Surely, the brass told the DDR&E office, you can find another job for these guys.

Finally, and most critically, there was the growing crisis in command and control, the military art of making timely decisions and then getting those decisions implemented by forces in the field. As venerable as this art was, predating even the Bronze Age, the Nuclear Age had given it an urgency greater by several orders of magnitude. After Sputnik, in fact, it was all too easy to imagine a U.S. president’s being confronted with an ICBM sneak attack that would oblige him to make apocalyptic decisions on a time scale of minutes—and then have his decisions carried out with split-second timing by forces scattered around the globe. In March 1961, President Kennedy seemed to have this possibility very much in mind when he sent a special message to Congress on defense spending. Commandand-control systems, he said, needed to become “more flexible, more selective, more deliberate, better protected, and under ultimate civilian authority at all times.”

Once again, the research component of this issue promptly made its way to the DDR&E office, where it joined the White Elephants and the Orphan. The obvious solution soon presented itself. In June 1961, word came down to Ruina that ARPA should organize a “command-and-control research project”—which was to say, a $6-million-per-year contract with SDC to study command and control, using one of the Q-32s.

Ruina was dubious; he’d never had a high opinion of SDC. Still, the idea itself seemed sensible enough. At every level—maps, weather reports, intelligence reports, logistics, communications, even war games and training—modern command and control was a massive exercise in information processing. Computers could be a godsend to the military. And $6 million per year was negligible by Pentagon standards, even then. So Ruina signed off on the SDC proposal and then, distracted by ARPA’s bigger-ticket programs, pretty much forgot about it. From his perspective, in fact, command and control didn’t really become an issue again until the following November, when staffers brought him the results of an outside study that ARPA had commissioned on how to apply computers in the field. ARPA had a real opportunity here, said the report: instead of just accepting whatever the computer industry had to offer, the agency could take on computer research directly, expanding it into “potentially fruitful” areas such as better programming techniques and better communication between machines and their users.

Hmm. Do a little research on computers and information processing? Frankly, the thought hadn’t occurred to Ruina. But once he heard the idea, he says, “I remember being impressed that this program sounded reasonable.”

And that—given the new ARPA style of decisiveness—was that. So the only real question now was who the agency should get to manage its new commandand-control/computing program. Unfortunately, says Ruina, this is where his memory gets hazy; he cannot for the life of him remember how J. C. R. Licklider’s name came up. But from somewhere Ruina got the suggestion that Lick should not only head the new command-and-control effort but simultaneously run a small ARPA behavioral-science program that also needed a director.

Behavior and computing!? What kind of combination was that? “It seemed strange,” recalls Ruina. But then, Lick was one guy who might be able to pull it off. “When the name came up I had known of him, and maybe met him once or twice,” Ruina says. And what he knew sounded good. A very distinguished career in psychology. Human-factors work on SAGE. Lots of consulting with the air force, including half a dozen years on its scientific advisory board. Lots of recent work with computers. Definitely a self-starter.

“I went for it right away,” says Ruina. J. C. R. Licklider it was. The only problem was that J. C. R. Licklider wasn’t interested. He was as patriotic as anyone, he told Ruina when the ARPA director called. But what with the PDP-1, time-sharing, the “library of the future” project, and all his other activities at BBN, he was having a wonderful time up in Cambridge. So why should he bury himself in the bureaucratic limbo of Washington?

In the end, in fact, Lick agreed to come to Washington only because he’d been talked into it—though it was Lick himself who’d done most of the talking.

As Lick told the story in his 1988 interview, Ruina invited him down to the Pentagon sometime in early 1962 along with a backup candidate, Fred Frick, who had been a colleague of his at Harvard and now headed the communications division at Lincoln Laboratory. Both of them were skeptical, he says, but then “Ruina got Gene Fubini to give us a sales pitch.”

Fubini, then a staffer in the DDR&E’s office, was a physicist Lick had known professionally. He described him as “a very sharp, incisive, impatient kind of guy; quite eloquent, and really dedicated to this job at the Pentagon. He made Frick and me feel that the world needed at least one of us.” And with that, Lick admitted, “I started to wax eloquent on my view of the thing: that the problems of command and control were essentially problems of man-computer interaction. I thought it was just ridiculous having command-and-control systems based on batch processing. Who can direct a battle when he’s got to write a program in the middle of the battle? Fubini essentially agreed a hundred percent with that, and so did Ruina. We started seeing that this whole military thing was not developed right.”

In effect, Lick explained to them, everyone at the Pentagon was still thinking of computers as giant calculators and data processors. For that matter, so was practically everyone at IBM and in the rest of the computer industry. And that, he remembered telling Ruina and Fubini, was where ARPA had its real opportunity: “This kind of [interactive] computing almost did not exist. But up in Cambridge everybody was excited about making it exist. [So] why didn’t we really develop an interactive computing? If the Defense Department’s need for that was to provide an underpinning for command and control, fine. But it was probably necessary in intelligence and other parts of the military, too.” Indeed, he insisted, interactive computing had the potential to transform human life in the civilian sphere as well—everywhere, in fact. “I was just a true believer,” he said. “I was one of the very few people, at that time, who had been sitting at a computer console four or five hours a day, or maybe even more. It was very compelling. I was terribly frustrated at the limitations of the equipment we had, but I also saw how fast it [was] getting better... . I thought, This is going to revolutionize how people think, how things are done. ... I thought we were going to double [human productivity,] or triple it, or multiply it by four or ten.”

Now then, Lick told Ruina and Fubini, warming to his subject, let’s take a look at your behavioral-science program. Maybe it isn’t as far afield from command and control as you think. “Notice that man-computer interaction is heavily involved in the skills and capabilities of the people as well as the machines,” he recalled telling them. So suppose he did agree to run that program jointly with the computer office—just suppose. “You won’t mind if I spend some of the behavioral-science money on the same dream of getting people to work with computing?”?

Um-not at all. By this point, it seems, Ruina was sold. In the normal, bureaucratic course of things, he would have been happy enough to hire a manager whose idea of command-and-control research didn’t go beyond the mainstream— improvements in database management, say, or fast-turnaround batch-processing systems. He never would have known the difference. Instead, almost completely by accident, he’d stumbled upon a visionary, a man who could take this amorphous idea of command-and-control research and put it into the larger context of human destiny. Unlike most visionaries, moreover, Lick had done some serious thinking about how to get from here to there; in effect, his 1960 “Symbiosis” paper was a ready-made research agenda for this whole ARPA program.

Lick, meanwhile, seems to have convinced himself that he had to seize the opportunity. Improbably, miraculously, through some once-in-a-lifetime alignment of all the right planets, ARPA was offering him a chance to turn his vision into a reality.* He could reinvent the whole field of computing. He could transform those giant calculating machines into full-fledged partners in human creativity. He could create “information utilities” that spanned the continent. He could democratize information by opening up vast libraries of material to instant access by anyone. And he could do it all with the Pentagon’s money.

So by the spring of 1962 it was settled: Licklider would take a one-year leave of absence from BBN and come on down to Washington. Including the SDC contract, his budget would start at some $10 million per year, which seemed like a fortune to him. His first official day would be Monday, October 1, 1962. A VIEW FROM THE HEIGHTS Actually, as Louise Licklider remembers it, the family moved down to Washington a couple of months early so the kids could start in their new schools at the beginning of the term. Also, they had to get settled into the apartment Lick had found for them in Arlington Towers, right across the Potomac in Rosslyn, Virginia.

It took quite a bit of settling. Compared to their rambling old Victorian back home, the two-bedroom apartment was... tizy. In fact, since fifteen-year-old Tracy and thirteen-year-old Linda needed a bedroom apiece, their parents had to sleep on a fold-out couch in the living room. But then, Lick hadn’t rented this place for practical reasons. He’d rented it because Arlington Towers stood on the * And Fred Frick? On several occasions, including during his 1988 interview, Lick claimed that the two of them had ended up flipping a coin to decide who would take the job—“and I lost!” The problem is, it’s hard to believe that even Lick would make such a major life decision so casually. Besides, Ruina remembers clearly that Frick didn’t want the job, partly because of family constraints and partly because it would mean his having to take a big salary cut from his post at Lincoln Lab. Furthermore, in his 1988 interview, Lick told precisely the same story about an earlier decision, in 1953, when he and George Miller were trying to decide which of them would move out to Lexington with Lincoln Lab and which would stay on the MIT campus with the psychology section. They tossed a coin, he said, and he lost. However, while Miller did indeed go out to Lexington, he doesn’t remember anything about a coin toss. What he does remember is that Lick decided to stay in Cambridge, and that was that.

In short, the coin-flip story should probably be counted not as literal truth but as one of

the many jokes that Lick liked to tell on himself. very banks of the river, so they could walk out on the balcony and see Arlington National Cemetery, the White House, the riverboats, the bridges, the monuments—the whole broad sweep of the nation’s capital. Who cared about a foldout couch when they had a view like that?

Well, his wife cared, frankly. Wasn’t it going to be tough enough starting a new life in a new town without them all being crammed into a shoebox? And yet Louise could never bear to dampen that enthusiasm. This was a guy who got choked up at a sunset or a thoughtful gift, and who would come backstage after her theater performances practically in tears: “Sugar, that was beautiful!” If he needed a magnificent vista, they’d make do as best they could. So it was that on the morning of Monday, October 1, 1962, J.C. R. Licklider arose from the family’s new fold-out couch, drove his own car down to the Pentagon, found his way through the endless corridors to his zero-status office on the second floor of the D Ring, and introduced himself to everyone on his new staff—which was to say, his secretary.

And so it was on just about every morning thereafter. Lick would never be counted among the power brokers at the Pentagon. “He was an incredibly impressive person—#f you were willing to listen,” remembers Charles Herzfeld, a Vienna born, University of Chicago-trained physicist who had come to ARPA in September 1961 to run the Defender ballistic-missile-defense program. “A lot of people weren’t willing, though, because Lick came across as being so modest and shy. Also, he had this air of tentativeness about his ideas. He’d go on for hours saying, ‘If one could do this, then maybe one could do shat, and then maybe this other thing would be important.’ I thought it was charming. But it sust wouldn’t fly with the military and the political types.”

Still, says Herzfeld, that disingenuousness was also Lick’s secret weapon: “Lick was totally unfashionable—and didn’t give a damn. What he wanted was to intrigue people and get them involved.” And every time it really mattered, he succeeded.

Take for example Herzfeld himself, who would soon be sitting in Ruina’s chair as the director of ARPA. He vividly remembers a series of lectures on modern computing that Lick gave in the spring of 1962, months before his official start at ARPA. “The setting was a big lecture hall in the Pentagon,” he says. “It was a huge place, cold and ugly, maybe half full. But everybody was interested in this guy. Ruina had given him a strong endorsement.” And indeed, says Herzfeld, Lick captured everyone’s attention inside the first few sentences. Many of the ARPA and DDR&E staffers had used batch-processed computers for number-crunching and such. But here was Lick talking about time-sharing, interactive graphics, networking—concepts an order of magnitude further advanced. “It was a revelation,” says Herzfeld. “My first experience with computers had been listening to a talk by von Neumann in Chicago back in nineteen forty eight. It sounded like science fiction then: a machine that could carry out algorithms automatically. But the next big shock was Lick: not only could we use these machines for massive calculations, but we could make them useful in our everyday lives. I listened. I got very excited. And in a very real sense, I became a disciple from then on.” Certainly Herzfeld became one of Lick’s closest friends and staunchest supporters within ARPA.

Out on the E Ring, Ruina and the DDR&E staffers were having much the same reaction. “They did start off thinking that I was running a command-andcontrol program,” Lick said. “But I wanted to make it clear that I wasn’t doing battle planning. I was doing the technical substrate that would one day support battle planning. So every time I possibly could, I got them to say ‘interactive computing.’ I kept trying to convince them of my philosophy that what the military needs, is what the businessman needs, is what the scientist needs.” And eventually it must have worked, he said, because they let him take interactive computing wherever he wanted, without any real pressure to do “military” applications. Essentially everything he funded was open and unclassified.* Indeed, according to Lick, he hardly even saw Ruina: true to his antimicromanagement principles, the ARPA director met with his newest recruit maybe once a month or so to see how things were going, and then otherwise left him in a state of what Lick laughingly (and gratefully) called benign neglect.

Meanwhile, Lick was also expanding his network of allies into other corridors of the Pentagon, beginning with his counterparts in the uniformed services’ own research agencies. This was a matter of some delicacy: until October 1, 1962, their leadership in cutting-edge computer research had gone unchallenged—witness the army with ENIAC and EDVAC, the navy with Whirlwind, or the air force with the TX-0 and TX-2. And yet now here was J. C. R. Licklider, invading their turf with a budget that dwarfed the three of theirs put together. The potential for some nasty bureaucratic infighting was all too apparent.

But it never happened. “The people who might have been our competitors were really our agents and our friends,” Lick explained, referring to a deal struck in ARPA’s tumultuous first year: instead of building a new bureaucracy of its own, ARPA would make use of the ones that already existed. So when Lick wanted to start a new research project, all he had to do was give the formal go-ahead, and one or another of the service agencies would then write the contract, disburse the funds, keep track of progress reports, and so on. This was great for him, because he was terrible at managing that kind of paperwork anyway. But more important, it opened up the possibility of a wonderful synergy. Since ARPA and the service agencies were already doing the paperwork as a team, it * Lick actively tried to avoid what he called the cloak-and-dagger side of the agency; classified projects made him nervous. But he couldn’t avoid them entirely. In his 1988 interview he said that his office was used as a cover for one project that was so secret at the time that even he didn’t know what it was. Still being discreet a quarter of a century later, he would say only that he had paid for “digging a hole under Lafayette Square”—directly across the street from the White House. was just One more step to coordinate their plans and do their computer research as a team. And that, said Lick, was where the friendship came in: these were the very same people who had been funding Mis projects all through his MIT and BBN years. They could trust one another.

Quite soon after his arrival, in fact, Lick organized a monthly meeting at which he and his counterparts could bring each other up to date on the research they were funding, eliminate overlaps, and look for new opportunities to collaborate. And very soon after that, Lick expanded the meeting to include funding officers from NASA, the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, the Atomic Energy Commission, and any other agency around Washington that was putting even a little bit of money into computer research.

Their first time together was almost surreal, remembers Robert Taylor, who was then running an information-research program at NASA. “Some of the professional bureaucrats were dumbfounded. They had a history of giving grants to individual people in twenty-thousand-dollar chunks. But Lick was talking about millions of dollars and whole teams of people. It was as though these folks had encountered this alien creature: friendly, but strange.” Another participant, Ivan Sutherland, remembers his first meeting in 1964: “These people met, period. The group had no charter, no responsibilities, no budget, no purpose—but it was a great thing. We would discuss what was important, what was current, and what was going on. Precisely because the group had no charter, it was a wonderful way of getting information flow between the agencies.”

And the upshot of all this? Simply that this dreamy, talkative, hopelessly unfashionable academic had entered into a bureaucracy as tough and as turf conscious as any in the world, and with little apparent effort had carved out a niche for himself in which he could pursue his agenda with near-perfect freedom; deal with his natural enemies as a convivial network of friends and allies; and tend to his real constituency, the researchers, with little or no need to watch his back.

It would have been a bureaucratic triumph worth savoring if J. C. R. Licklider had cared about such things—which he didn’t. Who had the time? He was already headed for the airport. At MIT, Stanford, Berkeley, Carnegie Tech, and RAND-indeed, throughout the country—Lick knew there were scattered groups of people who shared his dream. His job now was to seek them out, nurture their work with ARPA cash, and forge them into a self-sustaining community that could carry on after he was gone. But with only a year in which to do it all, he had to move. LICKLIDER’S LIST From the minute he accepted the ARPA job, as Lick later recounted, “it was natural then to think, Well, gee, the first and most obvious and easiest way to get really rolling on this is to get some of this money into that gang at MIT.” It was still the epicenter, after all—the densest concentration of interactive-computing fanatics in the nation. “Happily,” he added, “I had been away from MIT long enough that I wasn’t too obvious in saying that, so I could do it!”*

He could, that ts, if the gang at MIT didn’t tear itself apart first.

The frustration levels were high, Lick knew: a year and a half after the Long Range Planning Committee’s endorsement of time-sharing as a campus-wide goal, progress was nonexistent. But Lick could now offer the perfect antidote: money. So he flew up to Cambridge soon after starting at ARPA and asked to meet with the key computer people at MIT so he could lay out his ideas for them and invite a proposal.

Things were worse than he’d thought. The whole gang turned out, all right; in attendance were McCarthy, Minsky, Fernando Corbatdé, Martin Greenberger, Jack Dennis, Doug Ross, Bob Fano, and several others. But instead of launching into a collegial brainstorming session, as was Lick’s intention, they immediately went for one another’s throat: “No, no, no—you don’t want to do it that way! You want to do it this way!” As a rueful Corbato would later put it, “We sounded like a pack of dogs going in all directions. It was really disgraceful.”

Lick himself seems to have taken the debacle in stride. He knew what MIT had to offer, and he knew he had planted a seed. Somehow or other, he would bring the group into the fold. For now, however, he had a more immediate problem. His $10 million budget may have been a vast amount by all previous standards of computer research, but $6 million of it was already committed to that one White Elephant out in Santa Monica. Like it or not—and Lick hated confrontations—he was going to have to reorder a few priorities.

Actually, some sort of confrontation was inevitable. Lick had been looking into the SDC command-and-control project since at least May 1962, months before he officially started at ARPA. And while he’d found a lot to like, including some pioneering work on how to deal with large databases and how to create large, complex programs, he’d found a lot more zot to like, starting with the fact that the researchers were using their Q-32 computer as a batch processor. “I hated to see it,” Lick later remembered. So in the fall of 1962, on his first official visit to SDC, he very courteously made it clear that he was cutting back on its budget a bit and that the command-and-control project would henceforth be an investigation into time-sharing. Reprogramming of the Q-32 would start immediately. “I was aware that this was cheating,” Lick conceded in his 1988 interview, still feeling a little guilty about it more than a quarter of a century later. “I was insisting on my philosophy, my vision of what I wanted to happen here, and these people had every right to have their own vision.” But there it was: he was trying to make a revolution, and he couldn’t afford to let 60 percent of his budget be squandered on batch processing.

The SDC group did not take it well—with some justification. SDC had always been a results-oriented, get-it-out-the-door kind of place, an air force contractor accustomed to meeting the operational needs of no-nonsense military types. Moreover, the command-and-control project team had been doing exactly what it had promised to do in its original proposal to ARPA. And yet now, with no warning, the researchers found themselves contractually obligated to satisfy an academic-minded missionary pushing dreams of a new human destiny somewhere off in the far, far future. It was a culture clash, to put it mildly. And besides, most of the SDC engineers were like mainstream computer engineers everywhere else: they found the whole idea of time-sharing ridiculous. According to Ed Fredkin, who had come along with Lick as a freelance consultant, SDC chief Herb Bennington put it in no uncertain terms: “Look, Lick, if you persist in this, we’re going to have to get you fired. Our contacts in the DoD are higher than yours. If you persist, that’s the end.”

Fredkin remembers being badly shaken by that comment; he’d never heard a bureaucratic threat being made quite so nakedly—or so plausibly. But Lick wasn’t fazed at all, says Fredkin. It later turned out that Bennington did indeed have pull with the air force, but it was easily trumped by Lick’s backing from the E Ring itself. “Lick,” says Fredkin, “was a pretty good infighter that way.”

Nonetheless, Lick needed enthusiasm and creativity from SDC, not sullen acquiescence. So on the flight back to Washington, recalls Fredkin, “Lick asked me to take on the task of making SDC want to do time-sharing.” The way to do that, the two men agreed, was to show the folks at SDC what time-sharing could really do for them. The result was a little show-and-tell that Fredkin arranged at SDC in November 1962. “We had Marvin Minsky, John McCarthy, Alan Perlis, Ben Gurley, and Fernando Corbato all sitting around this huge boardroom table,” he says. “They each gave a short talk. And around the wall we had people from SDC to serve as an audience. Well, it worked. The SDC guys were totally bowled over. This was the largest collection of topflight computer people that anyone had ever seen in one room. And they were unanimous in their feeling that SDC should drop what they were doing and start time-sharing. So SDC capitulated totally. By the time the meeting was over, time-sharing had become a foregone conclusion.”

Even Herb Bennington knew he was beaten. “OK, you’ve convinced me,” he said afterward, when Lick, Fredkin, and Minsky were sitting in his office. “But we're not going to make this a big project. You won’t get any more than twenty or thirty programmers to start.” Fredkin and Minsky looked at each other, trying hard not to explode with laughter. “SDC had done the software for SAGE,” Fredkin explains, “so to Herb that sounded like small potatoes. But we were used to having maybe three or four grad students on a project—part-time. To us that sounded huge!”

In fact, SDC ended up committing fewer than a dozen people to the project. But that handful did yeoman work. The new man in charge was Jules Schwartz, whom Lick had pegged early on as an excellent programmer and an able group leader—what he called “a really positive character.” He was right. Schwartz and his crew plunged into the time-sharing project with exemplary energy, now that they had been convinced. As requested, they got the first version of their time-sharing system up and running on the Q-32 by June 1963. Admittedly, says Schwartz, it was far more crash-prone than anyone liked, and it was hampered by its reliance on slow tape drives. But it worked. The Q-32 would go on to support a lot of good research in education, psychology, and display technology. It would even support dial-in connections from Stanford, Berkeley, and several other sites around the state—thus serving as a kind of prototype for the far more ambitious long-distance networks to come. Lick was extremely gratified by this, of course. But in the meantime, he still had a revolution to organize. Factoring in the small amount of money he’d taken out of SDC, his back-of-the-envelope calculations suggested that he could fund maybe ten separate research groups, large and small. “It was going to take more than that to make a movement,” he said. “But I felt I could settle for it if I just had ten.”

High on his list, for example, was Carnegie Tech in Pittsburgh, where Allen Newell, Herbert Simon, and Alan Perlis had created a movement all by themselves. To bring them into the ARPA orbit, Lick had immediately sent them three hundred thousand dollars out of his behavioral-science budget. Use it however you want, he told them: grad students, machines, programmers—no questions asked. And there would be more to come later, he promised, once they had had a chance to talk. Newell, Simon, and Perlis were startled; Newell, for one, had never even heard of J. C. R. Licklider. But they took the money.

Also high on Licklider’s list was the RAND Corporation, SDC’s parent company, located conveniently nearby in Santa Monica. Lick knew RAND as the home of JOHNNIAC, the hand-built clone of John von Neumann’s original computer at the Institute of Advanced Study. He also knew it as the place where Newell, Simon, and RAND programmer Clifford Shaw had created their pathbreaking artificial-intelligence programs, Logic Theorist and General Problem Solver. But when he went calling in the fall of 1962, Lick discovered that RAND had also begun to do some really innovative work in interactive computing. There was JOSS, of course, the mathematician’s “helpful assistant”; Cliff Shaw and his colleagues were getting ready for their first debugging runs, which would start the following spring. But there was also a new project known as the RAND Tablet, a kind of high-tech sketch pad that a user could write or draw on with a stylus, with the results then appearing on a CRT display. Now that, said Lick, was symbiosis. Indeed, in his 1960 paper he’d envisioned a graphical interface very much like this. Lick made it quite clear that he wanted to fund this work, recalls Keith Uncapher, who was director of the RAND computer group in 1962. And as Lick left, he says, they agreed to keep talking.

On to the San Francisco Bay Area. At Stanford University, nestled against the foothills of the Santa Clara Mountains, some thirty-five miles south of the city, Lick sought out John McCarthy, who was just settling into his new home there. Stanford, it seems, had made McCarthy a job offer that very fall—he’d stopped off for his official interview on the way home from the SDC meeting—and he had accepted immediately. He wasn’t angry at MIT, exactly. But why wait around for time-sharing zot to happen? McCarthy had immediately talked DEC into giving him a PDP-1, more or less for free. He had fired off a proposal asking Lick for money to do artificial-intelligence research at Stanford. And Lick, despite his annoyance at him for abandoning MIT so abruptly, had decided that he wasn’t about to leave the new Californian out of the ARPA family. So yes, he now told the astonished McCarthy, who had fully expected to hear “No,” ARPA will fund you.

Then it was across the San Francisco Bay to Berkeley, where Lick met with a young redhead named Edward Feigenbaum. ARPA, Lick hinted broadly, would like to put some serious money into AI research at Berkeley. “I was a young assistant professor,” marvels Feigenbaum, “barely visible above the surface. Where did he even get hold of my name?” From Newell and Simon, presumably: Feigenbaum had earned his Ph.D. under Simon in 1960, just before going to Berkeley. Still, it was enough to make you believe in fairy godmothers. And then, to top it off, Licklider also hinted to Feigenbaum and to the hardware maven Harry Huskey that he would like to see a proposal for a Berkeley time-sharing effort—a medium-size system, say, as a complement to what SDC was doing.

And so it went. Lick seems to have spent most of that autumn of 1962 on airplanes, trying to entice computing’s best and brightest to join in his vision. Of course, he did have to be a little careful about how he made his pitch. Early on, Lick would later remember, some of the old hands at the Pentagon had reminded him sternly that he was now a government employee, which meant that he wasn’t supposed to solicit specific proposals from specific people—a practice that smacked of favoritism, elitism, cronyism, and other undemocratic things. In the name of fairness and equal opportunity, they insisted, a government funding officer had to wait for proposals to come to him.

Not a chance. Waiting around would spell disaster, Lick realized—so he quickly figured out a way to circumvent the rules without actually disobeying them. “I took advantage of those other three leftover SAGE computers,” he later explained. “I couldn’t ask for a proposal directly, but I could go around and ask people, ‘Do you want one of these things, and what would you do with it if you had it?’ Well, people were pretty sensible. Nobody wanted one. But it did lead to a lot of discussions, and the discussions led to proposals, and so forth. So I was able to get proposals out of quite a few places without ever asking for one. They came pretty fast.”

By spring, in fact, those proposals would be overflowing his desk. But then, says Lick, he couldn’t pat himself on the back too hard. A few proposals did indeed come looking for him, with perhaps the most notable being a long, visionary document that landed on his desk at the Pentagon almost literally the day he arrived. It made for strange reading, he remembered, as unsolicited proposals often do. But in this case, Lick didn’t automatically dismiss it as the work of a crackpot, if only because he’d met the author once or twice before. At age thirty-seven, ten years younger than Lick himself, he was a handsome, dark-haired, but rather lonely fellow—the quiet sort who ordinarily might not stick in your memory. But then once you got to know him a bit, you saw that much of this man’s quietness came from his habit of lstening—deeply, profoundly listening to everything that was happening around him, and trying to work out its most fundamental meaning. And then when he did talk, his soft, diffident baritone somehow managed to be hypnotic in its intensity.

His name was Douglas Engelbart. It was in December 1950, says Doug Engelbart, thinking back to the morning when it all changed for him. He was twenty-five years old, and by every objective measure, life was good. A decade earlier he’d been a semipoor teenager in the semirural outskirts of Portland, Oregon, still getting up every morning to milk the family cow. Now he was several years out of school, with a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering plus two years’ experience as a navy radar technician. He was working at a good job at Ames Research in California, where he did electrical engineering for one of NASA’s ancestors, the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics. He had met a girl there. And that very weekend, the two of them had decided to get married.

And yet, as Engelbart explained to Howard Rheingold for the latter’s 1985 book, Jools for Thought, “the Monday after we got engaged, I was driving to work when I was hit with the shocking realization that J xo longer had any goals. As a kid who had grown up in the Depression, I was imbued with three goals: get an education, get a steady job, get married. Now I had achieved them. Nothing was left.”°

Driving onward through the vast prune orchards of what would later be known as Silicon Valley, Engelbart calculated that he had about 5.5 million working minutes remaining in his life. What was he going to do with them? He’d never much cared about getting rich. And changing careers seemed like too much work. So that just left... saving the world? Well, he figured, the world could certainly use a little saving, what with overpopulation, the nuclear-arms race, the Korean War, and a vast array of other problems. The question was, How?

Engelbart mulled over that question for several months, considering and then rejecting any number of idealistic crusades. But then suddenly, as he wrote in his own memoir, “up through all this delightful, youthful abstraction bobbed the following clear realization”:

¢ FLASH-1: The difficulty of mankind’s problems was increasing at

a greater rate than our ability to cope. (We are in trouble.)

¢ FLASH-2: Boosting mankind’s ability to deal with complex, urgent problems would be an attractive candidate as an arena in

which a young person might try to “make the most difference.”

(Yes, but there’s that question of what does the young electrical engineer do about it? Retread for a role as educator, research psychologist, legislator... ? Is there any handle there that an electrical engineer could... ?)

¢ FLASH-3: Aha—graphic vision surges forth of me sitting at a large

CRT console, working in ways that are rapidly evolving in front of

my eyes (beginning from memories of the radar-screen consoles I

used to service).°

The whole idea came together in about half an hour, Engelbart told Rheingold: “I started sketching a system in which a computer draws symbols on the screen for you, and you can steer it through different domains with knobs and levers and transducers. I was designing all kinds of things you might want to do if you had [such] a system... how to expand it to a theater-like environment, for example, where you could sit with a colleague and exchange information. God! Think of how that would let you cut loose in solving problems!”’

Within a few days, he said, the imagery of FLASH-3 had evolved into a vision of a general-purpose, computer-powered information environment. It would include documents mixing text and graphics on the same CRT display. It would include whole new systems of symbols and methodologies to help users do their heavy thinking. And it would include network-assisted collaborations to allow people to work together in ways that would be more effective than anything anyone had ever seen before.

Within a few weeks he had committed his career to this vision, which he now called “augmenting the human intellect.”

Within a few months he had left Ames Research to enroll as a graduate student at Berkeley, where he joined a group that was working on computers.

And within a few years, said Engelbart, he was forced to face the fact that his augmentation idea wasn’t going to earn him any applause in academia, let alone a Ph.D. This was still the mid-1950s, and the state of the art was still the IBM 704. When he talked about using computers interactively to help people, or to teach people, his professors and fellow students reacted with an incomprehension that bordered on hostility. So, bowing to reality, Engelbart wrote a dissertation on bistable gaseous plasma digital devices, a worthy topic that was solidly centered in the mainstream. Then, with Ph.D. in hand—along with half a dozen patents on the plasma devices—he went out looking for a more congenial atmosphere in private industry. In October 1957 he accepted an offer from a think tank known as SRI, the Stanford Research Institute, a university spin-off located just north of Palo Alto, in Menlo Park, California.

He very quickly learned to keep a low profile even there. (“Don’t tell anybody else,” urged one colleague when he heard about Engelbart’s ambitions. “It will prejudice people against you.”)® Engelbart continued to do conventional work at SRI for another year and a half, in the process earning a dozen more patents. Only in 1959 was he able officially to work on augmentation, thanks to a small grant from the air force’s office of scientific research, plus some reluctant support wrangled out of the SRI higher-ups. And even then, he later wrote, “it was remarkably slow and sweaty work. I first tried to find close relevance within established disciplines [such as artificial intelligence,] but in each case I found that the people I would talk with would immediately translate my admittedly strange (for the times) statements of purpose and possibility into their own discipline’s framework.”’ At the 1960 meeting of the American Documentation Institute, a talk he gave was greeted with yawns, and his proposed augmentation environment was dismissed as just another information-retrieval system.

No, Engelbart realized, if his augmentation ideas were ever going to fly, he would have to create a new discipline from scratch. And to do that, he would have to give this new discipline a conceptual framework all its own—a manifesto that would lay out his thinking in the most compelling way possible.

Creating that manifesto took him the better part of two years. “Augmenting the Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework” wouldn’t be completed until October 1962. But Engelbart was nothing if not dogged. “By ‘augmenting man’s intellect,’ ” he wrote, struggling to articulate his own gut feelings, “we mean increasing the capability of a man to approach a complex problem situation, to gain comprehension to suit his particular needs, and to derive solutions to problems.... We do not speak of isolated clever tricks that help in particular situations. We refer to a way of life in an integrated domain where hunches, cut-and-try, intangibles, and the human ‘feel for a situation’ usefully coexist with powerful concepts, streamlined technology and notation, sophisticated methods, and high-powered electronic aids.”

“Electronic aids” meant computers, of course, along with all the associated technologies for information storage and transmittal. But it was no accident that Engelbart started that sentence with words such as hunches and feel. Much of what followed was in fact an extended meditation on the human side of the equation: Precisely what was the nature of this system that he was proposing to augment?

Well, Engelbart wrote, let’s ask ourselves how humans have managed to cope with complex situations until now. Imagine a native of the Amazonian rain forest who is magically teleported into New York City: confronted with taxicabs, pay phones, and delicatessens—phenomena that natives of the urban jungle can handle with ease—he would be helpless as a baby. But wherein lies the difficulty? Not in the biological “hardware,” said Engelbart: at the level of neurons and neurochemistry, all human brains are essentially identical. No, the difference lies in the biological “software,” the repertoire of concepts and skills that each of us acquires over a lifetime. The ability to drive a car, the ability to place a telephone call, the very notion of money—these are units of knowledge that can be applied in a wide variety of situations, Engelbart explained, which makes them roughly analogous to data structures and subroutines in a computer program.

However, he emphasized, isolated skills and concepts are useless unless they can be organized for a larger purpose: “Just as the mechanic must know what his tools can do and how to use them, so the intellectual worker must know the capabilities of his tools and have suitable methods, strategies, and rules of thumb for making use of them.” Again, this is basically analogous to the way low-level subroutines are assembled into larger subroutines, which in turn are assembled into complete programs. In exactly the same way, wrote Engelbart, human capabilities exhibit a whole hierarchy of levels, ranging from the neural routines that are wired into our brains before birth all the way up to the high-level impulses we absorb from the surrounding culture—the commitment to liberty, equality, and fairness, for instance. Indeed, he suggested, this hierarchy is what we’re actually talking about when we use that mystical word intelligence: “If there is any one thing upon which this ‘intelligence’ depends it would seem to be [the hierarchy’s] organization.” And of course, that elaborately organized hierarchy was what Engelbart proposed to augment. All of it—“the system... comprising a trained human being together with his artifacts, language, and methodology.”

As a concrete example, he offered the office memorandum. To create it, the author has to engage in a variety of standard subtasks such as planning, composing, and dictating, each of which is composed of even simpler subtasks. But by the same token, the memo itself will be just one component of some higher order process, such as organizing a committee or changing a policy. Like everything else in human life, Engelbart wrote, the simple office memo is embedded in a vast, tangled hierarchy of activities.

Now, he continued, consider the reverberations up and down this hierarchy when a bit of augmentation technology is introduced at a relatively low level: “Suppose you had a new writing machine—think of it as a high-speed electric typewriter with some special features. .. . For instance, trial drafts could rapidly be composed from rearranged excerpts of old drafts, together with new words or passages which you stop to type in. Your first draft could represent a free outpouring of thoughts in any order, with the inspection of foregoing thoughts continuously stimulating new considerations and ideas to be entered. If the tangle of thoughts represented by the draft became too complex, you would compile a reordered draft quickly.”

With the possible exception of the Expensive Typewriter program being created by the MIT hackers at about the same time, this remarkable passage is the first written description of a modern word-processing system. And for the life of him, Engelbart can’t remember where the idea came from. “It was just a part of all those years of thinking,” he says. “Manipulating words seemed like the obvious place to start because it was a way to manipulate your ideas. That’s the very essence of your knowledge and thinking: the concepts in your mind that you’re converting to words and symbols. And since the computer should be able to manipulate symbols for you, it was ‘Well, of course.’ It could just help you in so many ways.”

Engelbart would later make it his top priority to show exactly how this could happen. In the meantime, however, he was wrestling with a more cosmic theme: his notion that computer-based augmentation represented an entirely new phase in human evolution. Our ancestors had taken their first great step beyond the lower forms of life when they developed the capacity for concept manipulation, he asserted: “We speak here of concepts in their raw, unverbalized form. For example, a person letting a door swing shut behind him suddenly visualizes the person who follows him carrying a cup of hot coffee and some sticky pastries... a solution comes to mind immediately as an image of a quick stop and an arm stab back toward the door.”

The second phase had been symbol manipulation, Engelbart continued, when our ancestors evolved the capacity to represent concepts with mental symbols such as words and numbers. For example, this capacity would allow a shepherd to keep track of all twenty-seven sheep in his flock by counting them instead of having to remember what each sheep looked like. Then the third phase was manual external symbol manipulation, he wrote, when our forebears invented a variety of ways to represent their mental symbols graphically: “a stick and sand, pencil and paper and eraser, straightedge or compass, and so on.” This allowed us to overcome the limitations of working memory and greatly enhanced our ability to visualize things.

But now, wrote Engelbart, thanks to computers that were capable of executing programs on their own, humans were embarking upon a fourth stage: automated external symbol manipulation. “In this stage,” he noted, “symbols with which the human represents the concepts he is manipulating can be arranged before his eyes, moved, stored, recalled, operated upon according to extremely complex rules... .In the limit of what we might now imagine, this could be [done by] a computer... with which we could communicate rapidly and easily, coupled to a three-dimensional color display within which it could construct extremely sophisticated images.”

Again, both the vision and the proposed technology sound amazingly modern. And again Engelbart has no clear idea of where the notions came from. But it was at roughly this point in his struggles to write his manifesto, he says, that another image struck him—fifteen years after the fact. Back in the late summer of 1945, he suddenly remembered, just after the surrender of Japan, when he was a twenty-year-old radar technician assigned to the Philippines to work on demobilization, he had stopped in one afternoon at the Red Cross library. It was a cool, airy place, built up on stilts like a native hut, and full of polished bamboo. One of the magazines available there was the July 1945 issue of the Atlantic Monthly. And on page 101, right after the latest installment of Betty McDonald’s comic novel The Egg and I, he had come across an article entitled “As We May Think.”

Of course! Engelbart hadn’t thought about Vannevar Bush’s Memex in years. But now that he had, he could see that it was just a matter of replacing Bush’s microfilm with modern computers. The essence of the system was all there: a device that could put the entirety of human knowledge at your fingertips, linked and cross-linked into an ever-expanding web of associations, on and on. Bush had been talking about augmentation all along.

Engelbart immediately added a whole section to his manifesto laying out Bush’s proposals in detail—most especially the latter’s speculations about the Memex’s somehow communicating directly with the brain. Although he hadn’t consciously based his own ideas on Bush’s, says Engelbart—his own statement was already in close to its final form by the time he remembered the Memex-—he still believed that even unconscious debts should be acknowledged.

In the meantime, as Engelbart wrote in his conclusion, the challenge was to get from here to there. His proposal for meeting that challenge—not surprisingly—was an interdisciplinary Knowledge Augmentation Laboratory that could pursue the technology of human augmentation as quickly as possible.

And that, he told J. C. R. Licklider, was what he wanted ARPA to fund.

Engelbart knew exactly who Lick was, of course; in fact, he had led off the “Related Work” section of “Framework” with a discussion of Lick’s symbiosis article. Early in 1962, moreover, he had briefly met Lick at the Spring Joint Computer Conference in San Francisco. And when he heard that Lick was going to be starting up a computing office at ARPA, he couldn’t help but feel a glimmer of hope.

Hope was actually in short supply by that point, Engelbart remembers. He will never forget the pitch he made to the National Institute of Mental Health in 1961, using an earlier draft of his manifesto: “Since your interesting research would require exceptionally advanced programming support,” read the rejection letter, “and since your Palo Alto area is so far from the centers of computer expertise, we don’t think that you could staff your project adequately.”!°

Well, the committee had a point; in 1961, the area around Stanford really was the outer boondocks of computing. And for all Engelbart knew, Lick might react the same way. But it was worth a try: Engelbart had a formal proposal and a copy of his manifesto waiting on Lick’s desk the day he arrived at the Pentagon. After all, he later wrote, “there the unlucky fellow was, having advertised that ‘man-computer symbiosis,’ computer time-sharing, and man-computer interfaces were the new directions. How could he in reasonable consistency turn this down, even if it was way out there in Menlo Park?”!

He couldn’t. Although Lick never publicly described his first response to “Framework,” it must have included a strong component of déja vu. Here was the entire idea of human-computer symbiosis, re-created by a complete unknown out in the middle of nowhere. Lick had to admire that—even though Engelbart had been quite right in anticipating some skepticism on his part (“Later,” says Engelbart, “a couple of his friends told me that his reaction was, ‘Well, he’s way out there’-—meaning far from MIT—‘in Palo Alto, so we probably can’t expect much. But he’s using the night words, so we’re sort of honor-bound to fund him’ ”). So by early 1963, Engelbart had funding for his project. Of course, he didn’t receive a huge amount of money, thanks to Lick’s steadily growing list of academic dependents. But it was a start. And at age thirty-seven, Douglas Engelbart was feeling, well, something this quiet, lonely man hadn’t felt very often before, certainly not in relation to his augmentation ideas.

“Lick was the first person to believe in me,” says Engelbart. “And he was the first person to stick his neck out and give me a chance. In fact, if he hadn’t done that, if he hadn’t stuck his neck out and given me money, I don’t think anybody ever would have done so. That was why I trusted him. Lick was like my big brother.” So there it was: SDC, RAND, Berkeley, Stanford, SRI, Carnegie Tech—by the late autumn of 1962, Lick had convinced himself that the Cambridge vision could be established on the West Coast, and in the Heartland.

Now if he could only get it established in Cambridge. ... JUST DO IT Even now, almost four decades after the fact, it’s still Robert Fano’s favorite story. And Fano, a short, round Italian who bears a notable resemblance to the actor Danny DeVito, and whose letter-perfect English still bears a strong imprint of his native Turin, needs no encouragement to tell it again.

“I was there to chair a session on communication,” he says, thinking back to late November 1962 and the Homestead resort in Hot Springs, Virginia, where the MITRE Corporation had organized a meeting for the air force on unclassified command-and-control research. “But I did attend some of the other sessions, and I came out with the feeling that command and control was a mess. Intellectually the speakers were poor. They had no vision. You couldn’t see any solution coming from them.”

This was not a reassuring thought, says Fano—not when it came less than a month after the Cuban Missile Crisis, and especially not when the hallways of the Homestead meeting were abuzz with rumors of a near-catastrophe. For a full thirteen days in October, the United States had placed nuclear weaponry amounting to some seven thousand megatons—the equivalent of more than a hundred thousand Hiroshimas—on hair-trigger alert. The Soviets had presumably done much the same with their arsenal. And none of it, on either side, had been held in check by anything more than a slapdash, wired-together commandand-control system that virtually invited a fatal mistake. On any number of occasions, apparently, humankind had come ¢his close to a conflagration that would have made World War II look like a playground spat—and we had survived largely by luck.* * The rumors were all too true. According to the Pentagon’s doleful postmortem, individual people, individual units, and individual technologies had performed very well, for the most part. But the command-and-control system that tied them all together had been a shambles. For example, there was the “missile” that U.S. radars detected rising from Cuba, with a projected impact near Tampa; the signal turned out to be a computer test tape. There was the first U.S. squadron of Minuteman I solid-fueled missiles, which were then undergoing testing

So no, says Fano. This was not a good time to be hearing that the air force didn’t have a clue what to do about the command-and-control mess. On the very last morning of the meeting, in fact-Wednesday, November 21, 1962, the day before Thanksgiving—as the participants were settling into the special train that would take them back to Washington, Fano voiced his concerns to his seatmate, J. C. R. Licklider.

Exactly his point, his old friend declared: this was what he had come to the Pentagon to fix (indeed, Lick had been one of the instigators of the conference). And with that, remembers Fano, they were off. He and Lick talked about the sessions, about Lick’s insistence that command and control ought to be done through time-sharing, and about his vision of symbiosis. Especially his vision of symbiosis. By the time the train was well on its way, says Fano, he and Lick had started moving from seat to seat, and their conversation had turned into a freefor-all. “This was a special train for the meeting,” he explains, “so everybody there was a colleague”—including Marvin Minsky, Oliver Selfridge, and any number of others belonging to what Lick later called the budding nucleus of his movement.'* Lick was in his element, making jokes and terrible puns and finding a ready audience for his favorite subject. Along the way, moreover, without ever saying it in so many words, he made it very clear that he still wanted a proposal out of MIT—a big proposal. MIT could make symbiosis real, Lick let it be known. MIT could give the world its first tme-shared “information utility,” a pilot plant for the continent-spanning utilities to come. And with some of the brightest students in the world, MIT could recruit a whole new generation to the cause.

Fano got the message. He and Lick were both aware that MIT’s real problem was lack of leadership. The young Turks who actually knew something about computing had no seniority and no clout and were scattered all over campus. If interactive computing was ever going to become a reality at MIT—and funding from Lick was perhaps the last, best chance to make it a reality—then a senior person was going to have to take the lead. “But nobody here was biting,” says Fano. Phil Morse, founder and head of the Computation Center, had already spread himself far too thin. Wes Clark and his LINC computer team were still searching for a home after their exile from Lincoln Lab. And that left—well, Fano knew damn well who that left. But he didn’t want it. He’d never liked administrative responsibility. Besides, he didn’t really know anything about computers: he was an information theorist, a pencil-and-paper man. and certification in Montana; in the rush to get them ready for use, squadron officials ended up overriding such key safety features as the multiple-key system, which meant that the missiles could have been launched by one person, acting on his own initiative. And there was the “intruder” detected in the middle of the night at Volk Field in Wisconsin, resulting in a series of alarms that the crews interpreted as the signal to scramble their nuclear-armed F-106 interceptors. With the air full of B-52s circling on full alert, and the interceptors expecting to find Soviet bombers, the result might well have been nuclear friendly fire over U.S. soil. The F-106s stood down only after an officer drove out onto the airstrip and got their attention by flashing his car lights; the “intruder” had turned out to be a bear.

Nonetheless, says Fano, all the arrows kept pointing his way. Information theory wasn’t so very far from computing, after all. He’d served on the Long Range Planning Committee. He’d even taken a computer course or two. “So I was the only senior member of the faculty who had some kind of connection, as feeble as it was, to computation,” he says.

And now, of course, here was his old friend J. C. R. Licklider, sweeping him up in that contagious enthusiasm.

It was a Jo-o-ong train ride, Fano remembers—four or five hours. Still, when the train finally rolled into Washington’s Union Station, he said good-bye to Lick without making any promises. Excited though he was, he says, “I was afraid I could not make it work.” Instead, he just kept turning the possibilities over and over in his mind during the flight back to Boston. Then the next day, after he and his wife had survived Thanksgiving dinner with their children, who were very small, he found himself pacing around and around the house. No, he didn’t want to be an administrator. But Lick was offering MIT a chance to do something very important for the future—which meant, in turn, something very important for MIT.

Important for MIT. That resonated with Fano. He had been at the school almost continuously since 1939, he explains, when he and his brother arrived in the United States as refugees from Mussolini’s Nazi-inspired edicts against Jews. During the war, when most of the electrical engineering department had vanished into the Radiation Laboratory and he couldn’t follow them—as an Italian citizen, he was technically an enemy alien—he had taken over many of the department’s courses and taught them single-handedly. After the war, he had experienced the glory years of RLE, when ideas, people, and energy just seemed to gravitate to it from all directions. And in the mid-1950s he had felt a keen disappointment as the glory years faded, as people got more and more preoccupied with their own disciplines. For a long time now, in fact, he had been wondering how to revive that old spirit. Creating an explosive intellectual environment was a bit like planning a successful party: it had to have an indefinable spark, an unpredictable, near-magical mix of just the right time, just the right place, just the right people, and just the right challenge to get them pumping. No one had a surefire formula. But this new program of Lick’s—now maybe, just maybe... .

“What got into me I do not know,” says Fano. “But at a certain point on Thanksgiving Day I said, “OK, if nobody else is going to do it, J am going to do it.’ ”

The next morning, he continues, as he was finishing up a previously scheduled meeting with MIT’s provost, Charles Townes, he recounted Lick’s idea for a prototype information utility, and his own intention to lead the effort to build it at MIT. “Do you want to think about this and let me know whether you think it makes sense?” Fano asked.

“No,” said Townes with barely a hesitation. “Go ahead.”

Fano was startled; he’d expected at least some academic dithering. But then, he wasn’t asking Townes for money, was he? He was offering him Lick’s money. And that had always been the problem: the MIT higher-ups weren’t agaznst time-sharing; they just didn’t want to pay for it.

Holing up for the weekend, Fano hammered out a two-page memo summarizing what he had in mind. Then on Monday morning, he says, “I distributed the memo to key people, like my department head, who was Peter Elias at that time, and then to Gordon Brown, who was dean of engineering, and of course, Charlie Townes, and Julius Stratton, who was president of MIT. I found out later that Gordon Brown told his secretary to file it under ‘FF,’ meaning ‘Fano’s Folly.’ ”

No matter. On Tuesday, Fano and Phil Morse went to see Stratton. The MIT president listened carefully, says Fano. And once he, too, was satisfied that he wasn’t being asked for money, he had only one real question: “Where are you going to do this?”

Oops. This was not a trivial matter, Fano knew. MIT was desperately overcrowded as it was. There was literally no place on campus to put a new project. Fortunately, however, Fano had spent Monday doing his homework. According to rumor, he told Stratton, an out-of-town computer company had fallen on hard times and wanted someone to take over its lease at a brand-new office park just north of campus. The lease covered the top two floors of one of the highrises, 545 Technology Square. “That would be practically ideal,” Fano explains, “because we were going to have a big computing installation, and the ninth floor was already planned for that purpose. We could use the eighth floor for offices.”

“OK,” said Stratton. “Look into it.”

And that was that, says Fano: “I did look into it, and the rumor turned out to be true. Well, anyway, that was a Tuesday. Lick had already planned to come to town on Thursday for some other reason. On Thursday we all gathered in Stratton’s office—Lick, Stratton, Phil Morse, and I—where the four of us shook hands. And that was the decision!”

Just think, says Fano, still marveling after all this time—just think what a decision like that would involve today. “There would be all kinds of committees, and inquiries, and peer review, and red tape. It would take forever. But we did it all within one week: Thursday to Thursday. Because all the parties concerned just decided that yes, we were going to do this.” Alas, no one can escape red tape quite that easily. Handshakes were a beginning. But Lick couldn’t give MIT a penny of real money until ARPA had approved a formal proposal. So Fano and his colleagues had to produce one, fast.

Of course, as Fano discovered very quickly, they wouldn’t be working alone. If Lick didn’t actually write the proposal for them, he certainly made his wishes known. “I felt bad,” Lick admitted in his 1988 interview. “I knew Bob very well, and he was a good writer. But this proposal was just absolutely crucial to me, because it was going to be my first one. A lot of people [at ARPA] were going to see it, and he had to make it a good one. So I talked with Bob at some length on two or three occasions. [I told him that] MIT had a lot of flexibility in just which projects to do. But it was clear that there’s got to be artificial intelligence. There’s got to be time-sharing. There’s got to be interactive stuff like the Teager Tablet [a penlike input device developed by the engineer Herbert Teager], and graphics like the Kludge [an experimental graphics display terminal]. I would have been very unhappy not to have that....I wanted to hear ‘Computers are as much for communication as they are for calculation.’ Then I wanted assurance there were going to be good people working on the project. I wanted a summer study that would bring people from all over the industry, that would try to shape up this field and make it clear what we were doing. And I also said that I wanted a lot of help, although I didn’t want that written in the proposal. I wanted to be able to get an MIT person to visit SDC [and evaluate what was going on there]. I wanted people to take time off from their research to have meetings to think about how the program was going to go.”

Nowadays, of course, this sort of involvement in a proposal would land Lick in jail for massive violations of the federal procurement laws, which were greatly tightened in the 1980s. And even though it was legal enough in 1962, it would have been considered far beyond the pale for most agencies. But Jack Ruina’s ARPA wasn’t most agencies. As Ruina told Fano not long afterward, “I delegated to Lick. He agreed. It goes.”

In any case, Fano was willing enough to go along. For one thing, he and Lick were on the same wavelength here, so there was no real conflict. For another, he had more urgent matters to worry about, such as getting this project organized.

Happily, he had plenty of help on that job, too. Corbato, Dennis, Greenberger, Minsky, Ross, Selfridge, Teager—once again, the whole gang was there. Only this time they were rallying around instead of tearing one another apart. After all, says Corbatd, this was what they had been aching for all along. “I think most of us felt that it was more than just a project,” he says. “It was a major milestone. It served as a focal point for all the computer-science activity at MIT. [In fact], it was really the beginning of the computer-science community here, because the theme seemed such a deep one that it would last a long time.”

Taking them at their word, a much-relieved Fano formed them into a Tiger Team—“a committee of the computer guys who were about to be parties to the proposal,” as he describes it. “They each wrote a little piece. I wrote the introduction.” In a nutshell, he says, their proposal was to create the world’s first true information utility. “[This information utility] will be by necessity a sort of bootstrap operation,” they wrote. “The evolving system will be, simultaneously, the main research tool and the primary object of experimentation, as well as the tangible product of the development effort.”!? Their basic strategy was to start with Corbatdé’s CTSS, which was already running on the Computation Center’s IBM 7090. Then, as soon as possible, they would move CTSS to a new computer dedicated to this project alone—namely, an upgraded version of the 7090 known as the IBM 7094 (paid for by ARPA, of course). True, the 7094 would be just about as crummy at time-sharing as the 7090 was. But it would at least give its users something like twenty-four-hour-a-day access right away. This would then provide the project with enough real-world experience to replace CTSS with a new and much-improved time-sharing system. And that system, in turn, would run on a totally new computer, along the lines envisioned in the Long Range Planning Committee’s report.

Thus the bootstrap: from kludgy CTSS to a sophisticated new generation. And all along the way, of course, MIT would be fostering computer education, as well as cultivating a wider user community. Indeed, Fano was already out beating the bushes. “From the end of 1962 until the spring of 1963 I was busy giving talks around MIT,” he says. “It was important in my mind, and it was important in Lick’s mind, to get people hooked on time-sharing. ... You couldn’t develop and improve the system without seeing how a large and diverse community used it in practice.”

With innumerable details to get right, and dozens of people to bring on board, Fano and his colleagues had a frazzled holiday season that year. Even so— and perhaps this was a measure of how badly they wanted the project—they managed to finish their proposal just before Christmas, barely three weeks after the handshake in Stratton’s office. The week after Christmas gave them a moment to catch their collective breath. Then, in January 1963, they took the proposal to Washington for a formal presentation to ARPA.

Lick was at least as nervous as they were (Louise Licklider remembers his becoming noticeably preoccupied and uncommunicative in the days leading up to the presentation, even during his sacrosanct dinner hour with Tracy and Linda). But in fact it went beautifully. “This was a fantastically good proposal,” Lick said in his 1988 interview. “The people who could turn me on or off easily [Ruina, Fubini, and their associates] were very bright people, and they had seen too many bum proposals in their lives. [But] they saw this one and said, “That’s legitimate.’ And just like Charlie Townes said, ‘Do it,’ and Stratton said, ‘Do it,’ they said, ‘Do it’—and it was all over.”!* Miraculously, improbably, the planets were still lining up.

But once again, that was only the prelude to a whole new round of headaches. First and foremost, the MIT team was now facing a new deadline: Lick had wanted a summer study, so the proposal had promised him a six-week program starting on July 1, 1963. That did zot leave a lot of time. Lick had made it very clear that this summer study would be the de facto launch of the ARPA program, the event that would bring his people together and turn them into a real community. So Fano and his new deputy, Oliver Selfridge, started drafting an invitation list that included McCarthy, Perlis, Engelbart, Feigenbaum, Uncapher—everyone who was involved with the ARPA program or even thinking about getting involved. At the same time, the project team swiftly realized that this was an opportunity to look over the latest crop of young hotshots from the computer industry, with an eye toward recruiting some of the best for MIT. At the very least, it might encourage a few people in industry to start thinking about something besides bigger batch processors. And then there were the various government-agency people, the Lincoln Laboratory people, and on and on. Fano and Selfridge eventually compiled a list of more than a hundred invitees.

Meanwhile, since this summer study was also going to be the first extended, real-world demonstration of time-sharing, Corbaté and his team now had to prepare for the fact that every know-it-all in the computer world would be standing right there watching for foul-ups. Then, too, the participants gathered at Tech Square would actually have a choice of time-sharing systems. They could use CTSS terminals connected to the Computation Center just a few blocks away, or terminals connected via telephone lines to SDC’s new Q-32 time-sharing system out in Santa Monica. This arrangement wasn’t intended to be a competition, exactly. Corbato had already spent a fair amount of time advising the SDC group, and he got along very well with the team leader, Jules Schwartz. But still, he was not going to let CTSS be an embarrassment.

“All spring we were furiously getting the system ready for the summer,” Corbato says. It was one thing to demonstrate CTSS for an hour or two; they’d been able to do that since November 1961. But now the Computation Center’s poor, overworked 7090 was going to have dozens of people pounding on it nonstop for several weeks. “We had to make several key upgrades to make the equipment viable,” he says. “One of them was that we attached an IBM 1301 random-access disk file.” This was essentially what we’d now call a hard disk, except that in those days it was the size of a washing machine. But it had enough storage capacity to keep all the users’ programs and data available for instant retrieval, and it was much, much faster than the tape drives that had been their only storage option up to that point. “The second thing we had to do was get typewriters [the remote terminals] connected in quantity,” he says. “They turned out to be Teletypes or IBM [typewriters] initially. There were no lower-case letters, so the output looked like a telegram. Then we ended up getting a huge kludge of a controller, which attached to the IBM 7090, and which allowed us to run with a nominal load of, I think, sixteen active terminals at one time. We also got a telephone switch installed so that people could dial in from many sites with the use of modems.” On the administrative front, meanwhile, Corbaté arranged to “borrow” huge chunks of the Computation Center’s computer time for the summer study to use free of charge, while the higher-ups tacitly agreed to look the other way. So all in all, he says, “that was a very exciting period!”

Perhaps a little too exciting at times—especially for Bob Fano, who knew that every bit of this work was being done without a formal contract from ARPA. MIT was actually a part owner of the Tech Square development, Fano explains. So in effect, the school was asking for taxpayer money that it would pay to itself. It took forever to draw up a contract that would allow this to happen legally, he says with a sigh; “the lawyers had a field day.” And yet, incredible though it may sound today, everyone continued to operate in a spirit of trust. Long before the contract was officially signed—which finally happened on the last day of June, with the summer study due to start the following morning—Fano and his colleagues were comfortably ensconced on the eighth floor of 545 Technology Square. MIT had rented and furnished the space on its own initiative, and ARPA had authorized them to start spending money.

Along the way, moreover, the project had acquired a name. “The decision was made in a great hurry,” Fano recalls. “This was about March nineteen sixty three. I had just hired Dick Mills to be my assistant, and he needed a parking sticker. But then the parking office asked him what organization he worked for. Well, the only name that existed until then was FF—‘Fano’s Folly.’ ”

Surely they could do better than that. So Fano mulled over a few ideas that day, he says, and then tried them out that night. “McCarthy had come to town, so Minsky had a little party for him at his house. We talked about the name, and I pointed out that you could use the same acronym to stand for Machine-Aided Cognition—the ultimate goal of the project—and for Multiple Access Computer, the tool we were creating. It sounded good to them. So there was never any objection to the name.”

Project MAC it was. GOING GALACTIC Back in the D Ring of the Pentagon, meanwhile, Lick had at last admitted to himself that it was time for him to hire a deputy. By the spring of 1963 he could see that there were too many turf fights around the Pentagon that he knew nothing about, too many personalities, too many political nuances, and too many land mines that he could step on without ever knowing they were there. What he needed was someone who could keep him out of trouble.

“I talked to a lot of people in the Pentagon,” he remembered in his 1988 interview. “They said, ‘You want to get somebody who’s really credible to the military. If you can, find a war hero. Also, he’s got to know something about science, or mathematics.’ Well, I wound up with a guy who was a war hero. He was a flier who had escaped from captivity by the Germans twice. He also had run the computer center in the Pentagon, but the records did not say that. It turned out he had hated running the computer center so much that he tore up his records before he left. But I finally got him anyway. He was an astronomer by trade. Buck Cleven was his name—a very interesting guy.”

Colonel Cleven was indeed a gem. Not only did he skillfully steer his new boss around the land mines, but he proved to be a lifesaver in another sense as well. The proposals that Lick had solicited in the fall from RAND, Berkeley, and elsewhere had started showing up in the spring. But now that the word was out that he really had money to give away, a tidal wave of other proposals was pouring in as well. “Most of it was unbelievably irrelevant or low-grade,” Lick recalled. “And there were problems, like this character who came around with a gun that shot little rockets—fifty or a hundred little rockets—and demonstrated it in my office. These things got going and the place was left a shambles. We were lucky not to be blinded. So I just took advantage of Cleven and made him listen to all those things. He was fantastically charming. But his main job was just to make the visitors feel good and not give them any money unless he could spot that they had something—which was one case in thirty or forty.”

Lick felt a little guilty about that. Still, this division of labor did leave him free to concentrate on more pressing matters—such as how he was going to hold his movement together. While he had high hopes for the MIT summer study, it was only one event. What would keep that community spirit alive in the fall, after all the participants went back home?

The problem, he knew, was that any given research group might be working on one or another piece of the vision, but none of them, with the possible exception of Proyect MAC, would be working on every piece. The only integration was in J. C. R. Licklider’s head. “It was not a clear vision,” Lick explained, “certainly not in the sense of saying, “We'll plug these technologies all together, and that will be the system.’ Rather, it was a matter of getting a supply of parts and methods and techniques, so that eventually, different people could put together different systems out of it.” To keep it all straight, he added, “I used to draw big sketches on big sheets of paper. Then I would lose the paper. [So] I had pretty well wrapped up in me all of the topics that it would take to put interactive computing together.”

But what if he got hit by a bus? No, Lick realized, if this vision was ever going to outlast his tenure at ARPA, he would somehow have to forge all these groups into a self-reinforcing, self-sustaining community. Putting MIT to work on the summer study had been one big step in that direction. And by the spring of 1963, he had taken another step by arranging to meet periodically with the leaders of all the groups he was underwriting—people such as Fano, McCarthy, Uncapher, Engelbart, Feigenbaum, and Perlis, who were known as the principal investigators, or Pls. “[The idea was that] we would get our gang together frequently and have special Computer Society meetings,” Lick said. “There would be lots of discussion, and we would stay up late at night, and maybe drink a little alcohol and such. So we would have one place interact with another place that way.”

But Lick also had the kernel of an even better idea, if they could ever get it working. Early in his tenure—on Thursday, April 25, 1963—he laid it out for the PIs in a long, rambling memorandum that he dictated just before he rushed off to catch an airplane.

“[To the] Members and Affiliates of the Intergalactic Computer Network,” he began—making it clear by his phrasing that he meant the word Network to refer to his ARPA community in general and to his PIs in particular, not to a collection of wires. Nonetheless, wires were obviously on his mind. “It is evident that we have among us a collection of individual (personal and/or organizational) aspirations, efforts, activities, and projects,” Lick continued. The challenge now was to exploit “the possibilities for mutual advantage.” He saw a very real danger that those possibilities might never materialize—that his nascent ARPA community might never become anything more than a high-tech Tower of Babel, in which widely scattered enclaves produced incompatible machines, incompatible languages, and incompatible software. Geography almost guaranteed that, he wrote. So they would have to transcend geography. They would have to make it second nature for participants to build on one another’s work, by making it trivially easy for them to exchange programs and data no matter where they were.

In short, he said, the various ARPA-funded sites would have to take all their time-sharing computers, once they became operational, and link them into a national system. “If such a network as I envisage nebulously could be brought into operation,” Lick wrote, “we would have at least four large computers, perhaps six or eight small computers, and a great assortment of disc files and magnetic tape units— not to mention the remote consoles and Teletype stations—all churning away.”

Lick went on to discuss many examples of how people might use such a system, as well as the technical challenges of bringing it into being. At one point he even described something strikingly similar to the migratory Java applets that would appear at the turn of the millennium: “With a sophisticated network control system, I would not [have to] decide whether to send the data and have them worked on by programs somewhere else, or bring in programs and have them work on my data.” The computer could make such decisions automatically, he said—meaning that software could float free of individual machines. Programs and data would actually live on the net.

And so it went for seven pages, in what was arguably the most significant document that Lick would ever write. It’s true that his proposal was just an elaboration on the network of “thinking centers” he had envisioned in his 1960 “Symbiosis” paper—enriched, perhaps, by the more recent speculations around MIT about citywide information utilities. But in sust a few years, this memorandum to the Intergalactic Network would become the direct inspiration for the Arpanet, which would eventually evolve into today’s Internet.

Still, that was later. In 1963, as Lick knew full well, any attempt to build such a system would have been premature. “I deliberately talked about the Intergalactic Network,” he would explain in 1988. “But I deliberately did not try to do anything about netting them [the ARPA-funded sites] together, because it was becoming very difficult for them just to get their main projects to run.” Besides, the networking technology wasn’t even close to being ready. Lick did fund one small experiment at UCLA, which boasted no less than three IBM 7090-series computers on its campus, in hopes that the effort to link those machines would provide valuable experience. He also arranged to have Berkeley, UCLA, and SRI form what he called the California Network, tapping into the SDC time-sharing system via phone line. But that was about as far as he went.

Nevertheless, he knew he had planted another seed. And in the meantime, if he wanted to see what might happen when that seed began to sprout, he could always just drop in at MIT. The goal, as Project MAC activists never tired of explaining, was nothing less than the democratization of computing. As Martin Greenberger of MIT’s Sloan School of Management declared in the first written manifesto of the information utility idea, published in the Adlantic Monthly’s May 1964 issue, “Computing services and establishments will begin to spread throughout every sector of American life, reaching into homes, offices, classrooms, laboratories, factories, and businesses of all kinds.”!°

Of course, Greenberger intended his analogy to central-station electric power to be taken quite literally. Because Grosch’s law (holding that twice the money bought you four times the computing power) was still gospel in 1964, people were convinced that the most efficient computers of the future, like the most efficient power plants, would be very large and expensive. Nonetheless, the MIT vision that Greenberger outlined was remarkably prescient in describing how computers would be used. Assuming that Project MAC and the other time-sharing experiments could master the technical and economic challenges, he wrote, “An on-line interactive computer service, provided commercially by an information utility, may be as commonplace by 2000 A.D. as telephone service is today.” One major application would be electronic commerce, with on-line catalogs, on-line ordering and billing, and electronic cash. Others would include the routine use of computer simulation and dynamic modeling, “medical-information systems for hospitals and clinics, centralized traffic control for cities and highways, catalogue shopping from a convenience terminal at home, automatic libraries linked to home and office, integrated management-control systems for companies and factories, teaching consoles in the classroom, research consoles in the laboratory, design consoles in the engineering firm, editing consoles in the publishing office, computerized communities. Different subscribers to the same information utility will be able to use one another’s programs and facilities through intersubscriber arrangements worked out with the utility on a fee basis.”

That is not a bad description of what computing has actually become in the Internet era. Certainly it was a compelling ideal for the Project MAC team in 1964. The only problem, admits Bob Fano, as he looks back on that frenetic first year, was that he and his colleagues were hopelessly naive about how to get there. They really thought that they could create a computer utility through pure engineering. Just set up the terminals, string the wires, and keep that central power plant—um, keep that central computer humming.

They found out differently the instant they got real users involved. “It was a sociological phenomenon,” says Fano, who has never quite gotten over his sense of amazement. “All sorts of human things happened, ranging from people destroying keyboards out of frustration, to friendship being born out of using somebody else’s program, [to] people communicating through the system and then meeting by accident and saying, ‘Oh, that’s you.’ ”!© True, he adds, this kind of “virtual community” has practically become a cliché in the Internet era. But Project MAC was the first. And there’ll never be a first again.

The roots of this sociological explosion reached back to July and August 1963, when a total of fifty-seven people gathered at MIT for various portions of the six-week summer study. “For many of them,” Fano later wrote, “this was their first opportunity to use a time-sharing system and to explore the potential of on-line, interactive computation. The reaction was very favorable in spite of the fact that the system was often overloaded and therefore slow in responding to service requests.”!”

“Slow” was a bit of an understatement. As Lick himself remembered it, “There were times in the daytime when this thing was just clunking along and everybody was frustrated. [It was fortunate that] people were around at night enough when it was fairly lightly loaded to get a little insight into what they were really working toward.”!® Still, the very fact that users were willing to turn hacker and spend their summer evenings at a clacking Teletype terminal was a testament to how seductive a responsive computer could be. It was also a testament to the frantic hours Corbato and his team had spent getting CTSS ready. The unofficial “contest” with SDC proved to be no contest at all. Even though CTSS had to run on the overloaded IBM 7090, which effectively ground to a halt anytime there were more than about a dozen users, and even though Jules Schwartz and his team had performed heroic deeds to get the SDC system ready in time, the Q-32 was still using tapes for mass storage. MIT’s new hard disk beat it every time; the CTSS terminals were crowded.

Unfortunately, Fano admits, it’s hard to say much more than that about what actually happened at the summer study. He and his colleagues were so frazzled after getting ready for the big event that none of them thought to take notes. But Lick clearly felt that he got his money’s worth, he says: “A whole community got together, became friends, exchanged ideas, went back home—and the whole movement went on.”!? And of course, that six weeks of near-total immersion in time-sharing had whetted people’s appetites for Project MAC’s very own IBM 7094, which had been on order since January.

The 7094 arrived and was duly installed on the ninth floor of Tech Square in October 1963. True, this was no ordinary 7094: among other things, IBM had customized it with two extra banks of memory, one for the operating system and the other for the users. (It also had red side panels instead of IBM’s traditional blue ones; MAC insiders often spoke of their “red machine” versus the “blue machine” over in the Computation Center.) But its real virtue was its compatibility with that original 7090. Fano remembers one colleague mournfully predicting that it would take months to get CTSS working on the red machine, only to be amazed when Corbato and his team had it running within a week. Very shortly afterward, moreover, they connected the remote Teletype terminals and hooked in the 1,200-bit-per-second modems that would provide dial-up access. And by mid-1964, they were making the system available to users around the clock. The information utility was on-line.

Almost immediately, it seemed, they had their first irate customer.

“One morning I arrived first thing and there was Joe Weizenbaum sitting in my office, mad as a hatter,” says Fano. Weizenbaum had attended the summer study as an engineer from General Electric, and he had been so inspired by interactive computing that he had started writing a program that could carry on a real-time, interactive conversation in English. Weizenbaum had joined the Project MAC staff that fall and was now busy expanding his program into what would later become famous (or infamous) as ELIZA, the artificial psychotherapist. But he obviously wasn’t making much progress that morning, says Fano: “Dick Mills had come in, too, from his office, and Joe said, ‘CTSS was not working last night. I was told that it would be working shortly. It is not working this morning. What the hell is going on?’” Fano and Mills did their best to calm their visitor down, but all the while, says Fano, he was thinking, Victory! “Joe spoke like a public utility customer,” he explained. “His attitude was just what we wanted!”?°

But of course, Weizenbaum’s complaint was no joke, especially since it was only the first of many. Fano and his colleagues were starting to learn their first great lesson about utilities: what begins as a convenience quickly becomes a necessity. People begin to structure their work, their daily routines, even their entire lives around the utility. And as a consequence they become very, very proprietary about it. “Emotions got very high,” says Fano.

In truth, the Project MAC time-sharing system could be irritating at the best of times. If nothing else, there were the terminals: computer-driven typewriters whose sole virtue was that they were comparatively cheap, costing maybe a few hundred dollars apiece. “The problem was that these typewriters were produced for Teletype work,” says Fano. “And the Teletype standard was to use just capital letters! It was a real battle with the companies to allow lower-case letters. When we asked, they said ‘No, who would need that?’ The best we had was an IBM Selectric typewriter. And we had to modify it because the typewriter didn’t come with a sprocket drive to keep the pages straight.”

Then there was the system’s sluggishness. When it came to raw processing power, the IBM 7094 was roughly equivalent to the first IBM PC, marketed in 1981. So when that small amount of power was divided among multiple users, the machine’s response time plummeted to what Fano called the Threshold of Impatience: “I could watch a user sitting there giving a command, and then I would see his hand falling down from the keyboard [into his lap]. That took place in about five seconds.”2! And when CTSS crashed—which it did with distressing frequency, being an admitted kludge—well, Proyect MAC had to replace more than a few smashed keyboards.

Nonetheless, for all its irritations, CTSS was interactive. Make your way up to the public terminal room on the ninth floor of Tech Square, type in a command, and the computer would type out a response (eventually). Type in another command, and the computer would respond again. On and on it would go, in an endless (and rather Lisplike) cycle of command and response. Users found the experience eerily seductive, to the point where Fano had to take some steps: “I was very well aware of how hard the programming staff worked,” he says. “They were willing to stay here even in the evening to use the time-sharing system. That inhibited their family life. So I made the decision to provide teletypewriter connections for people at home. I only needed the terminal and a private telephone line to their house. My argument was that the extra work they’d do would very quickly pay back the cost. That was true. But what I didn’t anticipate was that I saved a number of marriages. The staffers were still hunched over their machines, but at least their wives could see their backs!” In effect, these terminals were the first “home computers”—a notion that would percolate through the computer community for another decade, to emerge in a new guise from the garages of Silicon Valley.

Meanwhile, Corbato and his team were doing their best to work the bugs out of CTSS as they went along, getting the system to the point where it became downright usable. In fact, they would continue that effort well into 1965, eventually adding some fifteen thousand lines of computer code. And along the way they would produce what was arguably the most influential single operating system in computer history. Simply because they were the pioneers in time-sharing, says Corbatdé, “we knew we were laying down a pattern that would probably be emulated and imitated. Indeed, that is the way it worked out.” CTSS’s fundamental model of human-computer interaction—the notion of a user’s sitting down at a keyboard and having a set of commands at his or her disposal—can still be found today at the heart of MS-DOS, Windows, Macintosh, Linux, and many other operating systems. So can such innovations as CTSS’s “hierarchical” file system, a scheme devised by Corbaté and his team to enable individual groups and individual users to organize their personal files into “directories” and “subdirectories” on the 7094’s hard disks. (In modern-day Windows and Macintosh systems, of course, such directories are called folders.)

CTSS was also instrumental in alerting outsiders to the fact that something new and strange had come into the world. Interacting with computers? Communicating with computers? Working with computers in your home? (Well, with terminals, anyway.) In 1964 this sounded a bit like working with a nuclear reactor in your home. “Very quickly, the lab became like a shrine,” says Fano. “We had continuous groups coming through: reporters, technical people, business people, U.S. government officials. The Japanese were all over the place. Officers of their major electronic companies were arriving with gifts, interpreters, and everything.”

CTSS was even good enough to convert a few die-hard skeptics, adds Fano. “There were a lot of old-timers who thought it was sacrilege to sit at a computer without thinking out what you were going to do beforehand,” he says. “Jay Forrester felt that very strongly. I couldn’t get him involved with time-sharing at all. But one day not long after we got started, he called me and said he had a visitor who wanted to see the MAC system. I got Dick Mills, my assistant director, to see them. Now, this turned out to be a little bit of a conspiracy, because Forrester’s chief programmer would have loved to use time-sharing. And Dick Mills knew that, because the two knew each other quite well. So when Forrester came here with his visitor, Dick Mills had one of Forrester’s own simulations up on the machine, so that he could deal with it interactively. Well, at nine the next morning the telephone rang. It was Jay Forrester: “Can I get computer time? And by the way, can I get it at a terminal at home?’ I said, ‘Sure!’ ”

And yet, says Fano, as gratifying as all that was, it was really nothing more than what they’d expected based on the electric-power analogy. Give people something useful, and they'll use it. What he found truly fascinating, though, was the second great lesson of time-sharing: in an information utility, the power flows both ways. Unlike a power utility, which basically just provides a resource that people consume, an information utility lets the users give back to the system. It even lets them create whole new resources zm the system. “More than anything else,” says Fano, “the system became the repository of the knowledge of the community. And that was a totally new thing.”

Once again, the credit had to go to Corbato’s CTSS. No matter how frustrating the operating system could be, CTSS did have one great thing going for it: Corbato had designed it as an open system, in the sense that users could modify it, tailor it, and extend it however they wanted. As Corbaté himself said, “This open system quality ...allowed everyone to make the system be ¢heir thing, rather than what somebody imposed on them.””2

To achieve that quality, Corbat6 had designed CTSS as an inner core of lower-level functions surrounded by an outer periphery of higher-level commands. The core took care of chores such as reading and writing data to the disk, interpreting user commands, and shifting the machine’s attention millisecond by millisecond from one user to the next—the time-sharing equivalent of unconscious functions such as heartbeat, breathing, and digestion. Corbaté and his team took direct responsibility for that part of the system and worked hard to keep it as simple and as comprehensible as possible. “I was always conscious of how we would explain this to a newcomer in a way where he could understand it quickly, without having to read a manual,” he said.”°

The periphery, meanwhile, was the user’s software toolbox, the collection of programs that he or she could invoke to rename a file, say, or print out a list of files in a directory. And it was here that creativity reigned. Users could write whatever new software tools they needed for the task at hand. If enough other users liked it, too, it would be placed in the public library; in effect, it would become a part of CTSS itself. This was a golden opportunity, and the Project MAC community wasted no time before taking advantage of it. Graduate student Jerry Saltzer created the TYPSET and RUNOFF commands to write his thesis proposal; together they constituted the rudiments of a word processor. “Practically from the beginning, we started using them to publish all the Project MAC reports,” says Fano.

Even more popular was undergraduate Tom Van Vleck’s MAIL command, which allowed users to send text messages to one another—and which thus probably ranks as the world’s first implementation of E-mail. Meanwhile, there was Allan Scherr’s widely used ARCHIVE utility, which would take a bunch of little files and compress them into one big file, with a substantial saving in disk space. And there was the OPS, or the On-line Programming and Simulation system, created by Martin Greenberger and his students at the Sloan School in the fall of 1963. It offered commands to simulate the stock market, handle accounting, do production scheduling, perform on-line modeling, and do all manner of other things.

And so it went, leaving Fano and his colleagues to shake their heads in wonder at how fast the sociology of software had turned itself inside out. In the batch-processing world, Fano says, programming had generally been a do-it-yourself affair. Sharing a program with someone else would have meant duplicating a massive deck of punch cards, physically carrying the deck around, explaining how to format the input data on the cards, coaxing the program into running on an alien computer, and so on. Who had the time? In fact, says Fano, “in those days programmers never even documented their programs, because it was assumed that nobody else would ever use them.” Now, however, time-sharing had made exchanging software trivial: you just stored one copy in the public repository and thereby effectively gave it to the world. “Immediately,” says Fano, “people began to document their programs and to think of them as being usable by others. They started to build on each other’s work.”

Indeed, the very existence of that public data repository on the 7094 quickly transformed Project MAC’s central “power plant” into the intellectual center of the community. Through E-mail, the exchange of files, and the sharing of programs, it functioned as the town square, the village market, the Roman forum, and the Athenian agora all in one—the place where citizens gathered to talk, to gossip, to conduct business, to propose ideas, and then to argue until they came up with better ideas. Within six months of the system’s November 1963 startup, CTSS and the on-line environment it supported had become, at least in embryo, everything that would later be claimed for the on-line world of the Internet.

In fact, it was even more than that. With more than half of its system commands now written by the users themselves, CTSS had proved to be just what Lick had been hoping for in his Intergalactic Network memo, and what Fano had predicted in the Proyect MAC proposal: a self-guided system. The very fact that CTSS was being (partially) created by its users meant that it was adapting to those users and evolving to meet needs that its founders never could have envisioned. Far more than Corbato himself had originally realized, his open-systems design for CTSS had deep parallels to the notions of free speech in a political democracy, free competition in a market economy, and the free exchange of ideas in scientific research. In each there is a core set of rules that everyone must accept to make the interchange possible at all. But beyond that, creativity reigns. Certainly the open-systems idea would prove crucial a decade or more later, as entrepreneurs struggled to bring computing to a mass market. In the personal-computer boom of the 1980s, for example, computer architectures such as the Apple II and the IBM PC would become wildly successful in large part by being open to anyone who wanted to build a plug-in card. In the 1990s a leaderless, unorganized thing called the Internet would be able to sustain explosive rates of global expansion in large part by being open to any network that wanted to join. And through it all, standard operating systems such as MS-DOS, Windows, and Macintosh would sustain a burgeoning commercial software industry in large part by being open to any developer who wanted to write an application. Indeed, the beginnings of that industry were already discernible in the new commands being written for CTSS. At the time, of course, no one could have imagined asking to be pazd for his or her handiwork; the spirit of the enterprise was closer to what would later be known as shareware. Nonetheless, there is a clear line of evolution from Project MAC to the shrink-wrapped boxes now lining the shelves at your local computer superstore.

At the time, however, a more immediate concern for Project MAC was the third great lesson of time-sharing: openness requires trust. After all, notes Fano, “the whole goal was to have people store their programs in mass memory, instead of on punch cards. But that meant we had to build faith in the system.” The users had to believe that the system would be up and running when they needed it, that a software glitch wouldn’t destroy a month’s work, and that their files would be safe from damage of any kind. And no one understood that better than Fernando Corbato. “Corby was the key to the success of time-sharing here,” Fano declares. “He can’t tell you that, but I can. We never had any major disaster in Project MAC, even though people were using an experimental system. We came close a couple of times. But it never happened, because Corby never said, ‘Tf this goes wrong...’; he always said, ‘When this goes wrong....’ He’d thought it through. He was not caught by surprise. His forethought about all the problems, all the tools he built into the system to avoid problems or to provide recovery when problems did occur—he was unique as a systems engineer.”

Indeed, Corbatoé had been obsessive about reliability from the beginning. “A lot of my thinking was formed by being an electronic technician in World War Two,” he explains. “I was brought face to face with sonars and radars, which were very new. And it was pretty exciting, keeping those babies running. You got a lot of practical experience debugging.”

That background had given Corbat6 a keen appreciation for Murphy’s Law: If anything can go wrong, it will, and at the worst possible moment. But then, in the 1950s, when he first started to get involved with computers, he began to realize that Murphy had been an optimist. Not only did you still have to worry about hardware failures—and before transistors came in, he says, the hardware was really flaky—you now also had to worry about software glitches, which could turn perfectly healthy hardware into an inert pile of junk. One bad keystroke could bring a multimillion-dollar system to its knees. And then when he started CTSS, says Corbaté, he discovered that time-sharing made simple software glitches seem like the good old days. At least with batch processing you were dealing with one computer and one program at a time, so that everything was more or less under your control. But in a time-shared computer, your computational elbow was constantly being jostled by other people’s files and other people’s programs, all of which had just as much right to be in there as yours did. It was like moving from a secluded cabin in the woods to Manhattan. Added to that were the newly encountered problems of communicating with the remote terminals: noise on the line, broken connections, modems that suddenly decided to freeze—on and on. And then added to that, says Corbaté, you had a whole community of users whose behavior was neither controllable nor predictable.

The result, he says, was a system with a certain potential for, um, spontaneity. You were never quite sure how it would respond or what was going to crash next. And the only hope for managing in the face of such chaos, Corbato recognized, was to accept that spontaneity. He and his colleagues would have to give up every engineer’s first instinct, which was to control things so that problems could not happen, and instead design a system that was guaranteed to fail—but that would keep running anyhow.

Nowadays this is known as a fault-tolerant system, and designing one is still considered a cutting-edge challenge. It means giving the system some of the same quality possessed by a superbly trained military unit, or a talented football team, or, for that matter, any living organism—namely, an ability to react to the unexpected. But in the early 1960s, with CTSS, Corbato and his colleagues had to pioneer fault-tolerant design even as they were pioneering time-sharing itself. For example, among their early innovations were “firewalls,” or software barriers that kept each user’s area of computer memory isolated from its neighbors, so that a flameout in one program wouldn’t necessarily consume the others.

Another deceptively simple innovation was the introduction of a clock, which would (for example) allow the computer to grab control back from a user’s program if the program hit a glitch and locked up. This sounds obvious enough now, says Corbato, “but people were very cavalier about time in the early days. Computers didn’t have clocks. There was no way to time-stamp files or to do something automatically after so many seconds. So in the very early days of CTSS, we used just an electronic time-of-day clock kludged in through the printer port.”

Still another innovation was that most elemental of precautions, the backup. “We were forced into it,” Corbato recalls, “because a disk failed fairly frequently, the systems crashed a lot, and so you had to learn to think defensively. Once you start tinkering with a program and you no longer punch out cards [for backup], which people had been used to doing, you are really trapped if the thing vanishes because you can’t re-create the details of even a week’s worth of work.” So in the beginning, he says, the group spent two hours every day copying the entire disk file on tape. Later they automated the process: “We had a little software demon that would run in the background, scavenging the disk to look for newly created files,” says Corbaté. “We’d back files up within a half hour of [their] creation, sometimes less.”

For the most part, the Proyect MAC community accepted these precautions with reasonable good cheer, plus a bit of friendly grumbling about the occasional inconveniences involved. However, that was mot the case for another innovation. With the launching of CTSS, Fernando Corbato instituted what was very probably the world’s first computer password system. Everybody in Project MAC learned the drill: each time you sat down at a terminal, you had to type in your own special code word before the computer would let you do anything. Later on, moreover, after Corbato had refined the CTSS file system, you needed a password even to access the subdirectory containing your personal files.

Users hated this. At a minimum, the notion of passwords in an academic environment seemed vaguely insulting; as Corbaté heard it expressed a few years later when the same issue came up at Bell Labs, “We just don’t even lock our desk at night. Anyone can walk into anybody else’s office, and a gentleman doesn’t read anybody else’s mail.”*4 But to the hackers—that fiendishly clever band of obsessives who had learned to program one-on-one at the TX-0 and the PDP-1, and who had now found a haven on the ninth floor of Tech Square, in Marvin Minsky’s AI Lab—passwords were anathema. As Steven Levy noted in his 1984 book, Hackers, “to the hackers, passwords were even more odious than locked doors. What could be worse than someone telling you that you weren’t authorized to use his computer?” The whole thing was so. . . corporate, like having to wear a nametag and sign in with a guard in the lobby. “To the hackers,” wrote Levy, “CTSS represented bureaucracy and IBM-ism.”

Corbato understood their grievance but stood his ground. “In order to try to get across the difference,” he says, “I used to refer to [hacker-style] systems as ‘clubhouse’ systems. You had to be trustful of the people using it, and you were basically at the mercy of each other, and that’s fine. Everyone knows the clubhouse works fine as long as everyone is friendly. It breaks apart when you begin to get differences.”*> Having been deputy director of the Computation Center, which served hundreds of people, Corbaté had a keen sense of just how different those differences could be. Yes, he wanted the on-line community to be an open community, in which all kinds of people would be free to join in. But just as in the outside world, that very openness meant that people needed a zone of privacy. If nothing else, he says, “most individuals are shy about exposing their work prematurely, before they have got it to a point where they are prepared to defend it. Things are still imperfect and flawed and the last thing they want is an attack.” Users likewise needed some assurance that they could go about their business without their work’s being trashed by the next guy, accidentally or otherwise. “Passwords were just a first cut at security,” according to Corbato. “They were a reminder to people that if they tried to trick their way past the passwords, they were doing something wrong.” They were also a reminder that you weren’t just an anonymous set of fingers typing on an anonymous remote terminal. Once you entered that password, says Corbatd, the system knew you as a person, a specific human being with a specific identity, responsible for everything you did on-line.

Fano backed Corbaté wholeheartedly on the password issue. When users complained, the Project MAC director’s standard reply was, “How would you like someone to write a paper before you, using your material?”*° (This wasn’t a hypothetical question; there were several instances of research material’s being stolen at Project MAC, both from offices and from the time-sharing system itself.) Nonetheless, with Corbato’s attempt to impose a modicum of social order on cyberspace, Project MAC had crossed over from technology into politics, thereby sparking a debate on freedom versus responsibility that was strikingly similar to the one that would roil the Internet in the 1990s. Along the way, prophetically, Project MAC spawned yet another new phenomenon: the hacker as jokester, vandal, and thief.

This called for a considerable change in the definition of the word: “hacker” had originally been a semireputable term for an exceptionally clever programmer. Confronted with CTSS and its passwords, however, the hacker contingent in the AI Lab reacted like the adolescents they mostly were and immediately bent their considerable talents to subverting the system. Usually it was a matter of playing practical jokes just to show they could do it—the digital equivalent of scrawling “Kilroy was here.” For example, there was the morning when Bob Fano logged on to his terminal and discovered that the message of the day now talked about a Project HAC. But sometimes the jokes were more serious, as when the “logout” command disappeared. When users finished their work, they couldn’t get out of the system to free up space for others; CTSS rapidly ground to a halt. And occasionally a prank would cross the line into criminality. Over at the Sloan School, for instance (not all the subversives were in the AI Lab), some of the young hotshots figured out how to cook the books and get computer time without paying for it.

To the hackers and their allies, it was all a matter of striking a blow for the People against the System. This was the beginning of the sixties, after all, and the information-wants-to-be-free culture of the hackers had a good deal in common with the property-is-theft counterculture that was just starting to emerge in the outside world. To Corbato, such behavior just proved his point: “We really did have in mind to build the prototype of... a computer utility,” he says—one that really would be as open, as simple, and as easy to work with as possible. But he and his colleagues also knew that if it was going to make a real difference in the world, this new thing they were creating would have to survive being used by real, fallible human beings. And in order for that to happen, the technology would have to reinforce such unfashionable values as courtesy, trust, and responsibility—not undermine them.

The passwords stayed. ART FOR THE MASSES Whenever her husband was actually in town, says Louise Licklider, thinking back over their stay in Washington, he would come home in the evening to have dinner with the family, and then he’d go back to his office in the Pentagon for another few hours of work—much the same schedule he’d followed back in Cambridge. And just as she had done there, Louise would have the drinks waiting when he got home for good, so they could talk over their day together. But one night, she remembers, Lick didn’t return until late, around eleven o'clock. And he was chuckling to himself, as if he’d just heard a great joke.

It was the art prints, he explained.

Ah yes, the art prints; he’d been driving her mad with the art prints. “When Lick was traveling,” she says, “he would try to schedule his plane changes to give him a free hour or so in a city that had an interesting art gallery. Or if he hadn’t been able to get to an art gallery that trip, he would go to a print shop. Either way, he would come home with an art print or two. Or five.” So it wasn’t long before cheaply framed prints were taking up all the space on the walls of their tiny apartment, and rolled-up prints were spilling out of the closets.

“Darling,” Louise would say as calmly as she could, “what are we going to do with all these prints?”

“Oh, we’ll just change them in their frames every week,” replied her husband.

Finally, she says, even Lick had to admit that it was getting ridiculous. “Well,” he suggested, “I’ve got lots of wall space in the Pentagon. I'll put some of them up there.”

That had brought a certain peace on the subject. But it was not long after that that Lick had come home chuckling. He’d been working, he explained as he and Louise sipped their drinks, and it had gotten to be later than it should be. As he was finishing up, in fact, he could hear the cleaning woman in the hall. So he opened the door.

“Oh, I didn’t know you were here!” she apologized, and turned as if to go. No problem, Lick assured her, saying that he was just about to leave anyway, and urging her to go on with her work.

“You know, Dr. Licklider,” she said as she was bringing in her brooms and dust cloths, “I always leave your room till last because I like to have time by myself, with nothing pressing, to look at the pictures.”

Well, Lick told his wife, he was so touched by that that he stayed for a while. He and the cleaning lady went around to the various pictures and talked about them-the play of light, the colors, how they made you feel.

Which one do you like best, he asked her? And to his enormous delight, she chose one by Cézanne, his favorite artist. So, to ber enormous delight, he gave it to her.

And that was why he was chuckling, Lick told Louise. The thought had struck him on the way home: Computers for the brasses—art for the masses.

It one of those lame bits of wordplay that he was forever coming up with. But somehow, something about this one seemed to strike him as hilariously apt.

Computers for the brasses—art for the masses. Leo Beranek was not amused.

Actually, Beranek hadn’t been any too happy about Lick’s going to Washington in the first place. Lick had gotten BBN into computers. He’d brought in twenty or thirty people, bought several machines, committed the company to fulfilling any number of research contracts. And now he was walking out? Leaving them all in the lurch, with a lot of half-finished projects that somebody else was going to have to deal with?

Well, at least it was only for a year, Beranek had told himself; they could cope for that long. BBN had gotten someone in to take over Lick’s programs in the interim—John Swets, who had been one of Lick’s postdocs in the old MIT psychology section—so life there could go on.

Except that it didn’t—not the way Beranek had hoped, anyway. Once Lick was ensconced in Washington, it soon became all too clear that he was studiously avoiding BBN: even in 1962, and even in the just-do-it culture of ARPA, there was no way he could funnel federal cash straight back to his once and future employer. Beranek was furious. Lick was handing out the biggest chunk of money to come along for computing research since Whirlwind, at least, and BBN wasn’t going to see a penny of it. The opportunity cost was horrible.

Still, Beranek decided, there was nothing for it but to grit his teeth; at least the agony would be over in a year.

Except that it wasn’t. In mid-1963 Lick came to Beranek and announced that he wasn’t coming back: he’d decided to resign from BBN and remain at ARPA.

“Lick,” said the appalled Beranek, “are you sure?”

Yes, said Lick, he was sure.

“But Lick, we’ve really done well by you,” Beranek persisted. This was grasping at straws, he knew, but at least they were substantial straws. As a BBN vice president, Lick had received a nice little nest egg of BBN stock; when the company went public in 1961, the shares had jumped from $1 to $12 apiece the first day, and now they were at somewhere around $15.

That had been pleasant, agreed Lick, thereby beginning and ending the one conversation Beranek can remember ever having with him on the subject of money. But even so, Lick said, ARPA was now where the action was in computing. He couldn’t let an opportunity like that go by. As Tracy Licklider says, his father was like a monkey—always reaching out for that next piece of fruit. And for now, he’d found it at ARPA.

In truth, his program was going far better than he’d dared hope. And by all reports he was having a wonderful time with it, presiding over his far-flung ARPA community with much the same mix of parental concern, irrepressible enthusiasm, and visionary fervor that he’d brought to his research groups at MIT and BBN. True, Lick’s nonstop stream of ideas and suggestions could be exasperating; the recipients sometimes felt as though their sponsor’s imagination were voyaging through the stars while they were still struggling to get their first biplane off the ground at Kitty Hawk (“No, Lick, we stil can’t afford to give everybody in Project MAC a display terminal as good as the PDP-1!”). But with rare exceptions—notably that first encounter with SDC—Lick was much more interested in being a mentor than in being a micromanager. As long as people made reasonable progress in the right direction, he would let them find their own way.

At Berkeley, for example, he cheerfully maintained his support even after the senior investigator, Harry Husky, vanished on a sabbatical and left the whole time-sharing project to two unknown quantities: Ed Feigenbaum, who knew nothing about hardware, and David Evans, a very junior professor who had just been hired that semester. “You'll be fine,” Lick said soothingly to a very nervous Feigenbaum, who had just informed him that one of the showpiece projects of his whole program would now be headed by an ignoramus and an unknown. And indeed, says Feigenbaum, they were fine. Evans, who would later become famous as a cofounder of the graphics-terminal manufacturer Evans and Sutherland, proved to be a great hardware engineer. Together he and Feigenbaum began designing the Berkeley time-sharing system, with Evans tutoring Feigenbaum as they went along. And by the fall of 1964, when Feigenbaum left to join John McCarthy at the brand-new Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, the Berkeley time-sharing system was almost operational. Project Genie, as it was now known, was well on its way to justifying Lick’s faith.

At RAND, meanwhile, Lick was allowing the interactive-computing group to learn from its own mistakes—or so he thought. He was dubious about the RAND group’s approach to the electronic “tablet” it was designing for freehand drawing and (eventually) handwriting input. The user was supposed to write with a pencil-like stylus down ere, on the horizontal tablet, yet the digital “ink” would appear only up there, on a vertical CRT screen; the veteran human-factors researcher was convinced that the disconnect would make hand-eye coordination impossible. (Lick would later have the same concerns about the mouse. What he really wanted was a kind of smart paper—a computer you could physically write on.) Nonetheless, Lick left the tablet development team free to try it their way—and within a year was back at RAND admitting his error. The group had shown that their “ink” did indeed provide enough feedback; users could train themselves to write on the CRT display almost instantly. “You were right,” he told them. “It works.”

Keith Uncapher, who was the leader of RAND’s computer group at the time, remembers being so impressed by Lick’s brand of intellectual honesty that he essentially bet the farm on him: instead of continuing to seek support for the group through its traditional, safe contracts with the air force, he shifted all its funding to ARPA. “Working with Lick was just so much more fun than dealing with nervous two-star generals who couldn’t understand what we were trying to do, or with colonels who had no interest,” he says with a laugh.

Finally, Lick started funding Carnegie Tech at a rate of some $1.3 million per year, even though there were only three major computer researchers in the whole school—Allen Newell, Herbert Simon, and Alan Perlis—-none of whom had any particular interest in interactive computing as such. To Lick that was far less important than the fact that Newell, Simon, and Perlis were all smart, tough, independent, and devoted to their own standards of excellence—in short, his kind of people. Moreover, the three men embraced the most expansive definition of their discipline imaginable. Just as botany is the study of plants, they declared in a widely quoted essay,”” computer science is the study of “the phenomena surrounding computers”—al/ the phenomena, from the physics of integrated circuits and the analysis of algorithms to human interface design, the social ferment bubbling up around the ARPA-funded time-sharing systems, and the impact of information technology on human life in general. Newell and Simon even saw a big overlap between computer science and human cognitive psychology. They had based the design of General Problem Solver, their next program after Logic Theorist, on data gathered from human subjects working on puzzles and games in the lab. And when they later came to publish a retrospective of their research with the program—a 920-page tome that is now considered a landmark in both AI and cognitive psychology—they would call it Human Problem Solving.*®

Perlis, for his part, had already taken the lead in creating computer science as an organized discipline: computing, he argued, was such a novel and complex endeavor that no existing discipline could cover it all. Indeed, he lived that argument. At one point in the early 1960s Perlis was not only teaching Carnegie Tech’s programming course but simultaneously serving as head of the university’s Computation Center; chair of its mathematics department; president of the leading professional society, the Association for Computing Machinery; and editor of that organization’s widely read magazine, Communications of the ACM. In 1965, moreover, when Carnegie Tech became one of the first universities to organize a separate department of computer science, Alan Perlis would be made the chairman of that. His energy seemed inexhaustible. Even in his later years, after multiple sclerosis confined him to a wheelchair, Perlis could dominate a room without even trying. Think of a gnome, a gremlin, a leprechaun, a grinning, mischievous, irrepressible Yoda. (Thanks to an otherwise benign condition called alopecia universalis, he was completely, utterly bald, without so much as an eyebrow.) He had a talent for deadpan quips that could send a roomful of people into hysterics, even as his words were sliding into his listeners’ brains and setting off time bombs. “People in the field would go to conferences and listen to every word he said,” Allen Newell recalled in an interview conducted shortly after Perlis’s death, in 1990, “because every time he talked about a topic, he was absolutely right about the way it should be. That’s why he was the first Turing Award winner.* Not at all for any technical contribution, really, but because he epitomized the nature of computer science.”

Certainly this was the kind of thinking that intrigued J. C. R. Licklider, who recognized that Newell, Simon, and Perlis were attempting an intellectual synthesis in computer science that was downright Wienerian in scope. Thus Lick’s initial, out-of-the-blue grant of three hundred thousand dollars in October 1962. And thus his decision in mid-1963 to designate Carnegie Tech as an ARPA “Center of Excellence” in the information sciences—the second such, after MIT. While * Established by the ACM in 1966, the Turing Award is the Nobel Prize of computerdom, the most prestigious award that any computer scientist can receive. Project MAC focused on the practical side of interactive computing, Lick wrote that autumn, Carnegie Tech would devote itself to the “effort to achieve fundamental understanding, to develop the theoretical bases of information processing.”’? By design, moreover, the contract would be open-ended. He already had plenty of people working on time-sharing, he told Newell, Simon, and Perlis. All he wanted from them was excellence. Train some great students. Explore some big ideas. Break the mold. “The evaluation was always, ‘If you guys are doing some excellent science, it [doesn’t] matter what [it is],’” remembers Newell.

It was an amazingly sweet deal for Carnegie Tech—and one that would pay off handsomely both for ARPA and for the country. By 1967, when the school merged with the neighboring Mellon Institute to become Carnegie Mellon University, the obscure little technical institute in out-of-the-way Pittsburgh would be well on its way toward becoming one of the finest schools for computer science in the world. If Lick was content to let people find their own way, however, he did expect them to perform; he was as impatient as ever with dithering, sloppiness, or mediocre quality. At the end of his first year at ARPA, he in fact pulled the plug on several research projects that hadn’t measured up to his standard. And for a while, sadly enough, it seemed as though one of them might be Doug Engelbart’s effort at SRI.

Engelbart’s project had definitely had its share of growing pains, not the least of which was an ongoing dispute with SRI management about exactly what ARPA was supposed to get for its money. To Engelbart, it felt as if the SRI higher-ups were pressuring him to do something safe and conventional—as if they were so embarrassed by his “Framework,” and so terrified that he would cause some debacle in front of a major sponsor, that they didn’t dare give him a free hand. Whatever the truth of the matter, though, this was one sponsor that was not interested in “safe and conventional.” So when Lick came out to SRI toward the end of Engelbart’s first year and saw how little he’d been allowed to do, he felt obliged to throw a tantrum with SRI management. “He chewed them out,” Engelbart remembers. “He told them, ‘Either you put Doug back in and let him do what he wants, or we’re through.’ ”

They acquiesced. In private, moreover, Lick promised Engelbart more time and money to get his project moving. Unfortunately, the extra funding still wasn’t enough to pay for both people avd a decent computer. As a result, Engelbart later wrote, he and his tiny staff were left trying to augment the human intellect with “the only commercially suitable minicomputer we knew of”: a hundred-thousand-dollar Control Data Corporation machine that was painfully slow and memory-limited. It was a pathetic stopgap, he knew; even with Lick’s backing, their extinction was only a matter of time.°°

What saved them was an unexpected offer of support from Bob Taylor at NASA. And no one was more surprised by it than Engelbart himself. Long before, he had visited Taylor at the space agency’s headquarters to drop off copies of both “Framework” and his proposal. But that, as far as he was aware, had been the end of it. What Engelbart didn’t know was that Taylor had been enchanted by “Framework” and had spent the intervening time drumming up support for the project within NASA. Engelbart might or might not be able to make any of his ideas work, Taylor had argued, but he was definitely headed in the right direction.

It was an argument that had obviously proved effective; for many years afterward, Engelbart’s Augmented Human Intellect Research Center would be supported jointly by NASA and ARPA (and later by the air force as well). But the more immediate effect was that he was able to get the equipment he needed, starting with a much more capable computer. Just as important, he was able to get the staff he required, including such notables as Bill English, who joined the project in early 1964 as chief engineer and turned out to have a genius for turning Engelbart’s high-flying abstractions into working hardware. Together they were able to start work on the first version of what they came to call NLS, a slightly skewed acronym for ON Line System.

NLS was—of course—an attempt to implement the grand abstractions of Engelbart’s “Framework.” But its specific starting point was his memorandum example, with its speculations about reordering ideas on the fly. Indeed, to modern eyes NLS looks like nothing so much as a text-based word-processing program from the MS-DOS era. Or make that a word-processing program on steroids: NLS would ultimately offer full-screen text editing, fonts, windows, outlining, hyperlinks, an embedded programming language, integrated E-mail, integrated address books, integrated calendars, and other “groupware” features, and much more besides. Perhaps the nearest contemporary analog would be a flagship package such as Microsoft Office or Lotus OfficeSuite.

But in that initial version of NLS, which the group started working on in early 1964, the big innovation was to have the computer write the text to a CRT display instead of on a standard typewriter terminal. Such displays were fabulously expensive in 1964, but Engelbart figured that by the time his group had really worked out how to use them, their price would have fallen considerably. And there was a surprising amount to learn. If nothing else, there was the 2-D factor—that is, the fact that the computer would now be displaying whole chunks of a file at once, not just one character or one line at a time. So to insert a piece of text, say, you first had to tell the computer exactly where on the screen you wanted it to go. “We needed a screen selection device,” Engelbart wrote in his account of the SRI years. “I wanted to find the best thing that would serve us in the context in which we wanted to work—text and structured items and interactive commands.”*! He and his team experimented with every device they knew of-—trackballs, light pens, joysticks—but Engelbart wasn’t happy with any of them. So they got more adventuresome, experimenting with foot operated controls, knee-operated controls, even head-operated controls (a nod would make the on-screen cursor move vertically, and a glance to the side would make it move horizontally; users tended to get terrible neck cramps). Engelbart still wasn’t satisfied.

Finally, as they were all sitting around brainstorming one day, Engelbart came up with the idea of a little gadget that the user could roll around on the desktop with one hand while the cursor tracked its motion on the screen. Since it didn’t seem any sillier than some of the other things they had tried, Bill English went off to the SRI machine shop and made one. It was essentially just a block of wood about the size of a pack of cigarettes, with some rollers set into the bottom and a wire coming out the front end to communicate the motion of the rollers to the computer.

Engelbart wasn’t totally satisfied with this contraption, either. And yet when the NLS team hooked up all the selection devices to their computer and gave users a choice, they discovered that people were consistently choosing the little gadget. The preference was so strong, in fact, that they eventually abandoned everything else; the gadget had become their standard. And by that time, of course—though no one on the SRI team can now remember when, or how, or why it started—they had all taken to calling the thing a mouse.

It was more of a joke than a name, really. They would surely find a more dignified term in time. But until then, well, it just seemed to fit. Of course, there was no mystery about Lick’s personal favorite among his projects. Project MAC was his flagship, and he went on board as often as he could. Sometimes he even brought along colleagues to show the place off; Charlie Herzfeld, for one, remembers being particularly impressed by a demonstration of interactive ship design on the Kludge graphics terminal. Not surprisingly, moreover, the enthusiasm was mutual. “I was amazed at how wonderful it was to have a sponsor who believed in what you were doing,” says Corbato.

That was probably just as well, since Project MAC was going to need all the support and trust it could get in the coming months. By early 1964, Fano, Corbato, and their colleagues were beginning to take on the computer establishment directly. And in the process, they were getting ready to bet the project’s entire future on what was essentially a roll of the dice.

At issue was the next step in their long-range plan: the creation of an industrial strength time-sharing system to replace CTSS. Granted, says Corbato, they ultimately got CTSS working fairly well, and they could have gone on tweaking it and adding things to it forever. But it was still fundamentally a kludge, with patches on top of patches on top of a batch-processing operating system that ran on a computer never designed for time-sharing. (Anyone who ever struggled to run Windows 3.1 on top of MS-DOS will understand the feeling.) From the beginning, their intention had been to follow it up with a system that would be done ight, that would be built around the notion of time-sharing from the ground up. Multics, as this hypothetical system came to be known-—short for MULTiplexed Information and Computing Service—would have the ability to run without interruption, spreading its workload over multiple processors so that one would always be ready to take charge if another went down. Like a power utility, the information utility would be available to users day and night. Multics would also have a bulletproof, hierarchical file system so that nothing would ever inadvertently disappear. And it would have built-in security: firewalls, passwords, private directories—the works.

Planning for Multics had begun right after the 1963 summer study, with a former Burroughs engineer named Ted Glaser as chief designer. “He was blind, but an amazing systems architect,” says Corbatdo. “We worked together hand and glove.” However, the actual programming of Multics wouldn’t get under way until 1965. In the interim, the group was absorbed by a much more urgent task: finding a computer for Multics to run on.

The 7094 was out of the question; it had never been anything more than a stopgap machine to begin with. As Corbato and his colleagues had pointed out in the MAC proposal, they needed to replace it as soon as possible with something along the lines laid out by the Long Range Planning Committee. And to do that they would need to forge a partnership, “a working relation with a computer manufacturer which would make it possible to discuss current machine designs, with the objective of acquiring a prototype, perhaps with minor modifications, of a future machine.”** The manufacturer would then have the right to market a commercial version of whatever they jointly developed. The end result, if all went well, would be the fulfillment of their long-term dream: interactive computing for the masses.

The trick was finding the right partner. Any manufacturer would have been happy to sell them a computer, but what Project MAC needed was a company willing to put some heart and soul into the job. One that would commit time, people, and resources. One that really shared the vision.

The job of finding that partner had fallen to a committee of four: Corbato, Glaser, Jack Dennis, and MIT’s Robert Graham. Starting in the fall of 1963, with Lick’s blessing and with ARPA money in hand, they hit the road. Their first stop, inevitably, was IBM. If nothing else, it was far and away the largest computer manufacturer on the planet, controlling some 70 percent of the world market. The other seven major producers—Burroughs, Control Data, General Electric, Honeywell, NCR, RCA, and Sperry Rand—had to be content with dividing the remainder among them. Analysts not-so-jokingly described the industry as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.

Just as much of a factor, however, was that MIT had been tight with IBM since the old Project Lincoln days, when the company won the contract to build the SAGE computers. IBM had provided the succession of high-end number crunchers at the Computation Center, not to mention the souped-up 7094 at Tech Square. IBM’s director of research, Emmanuel Piore, was a veteran of the Rad Lab and RLE, and Fano had made a point of keeping in close touch with him. “Very early in the planning of Project MAC,” Fano would write in a June 29, 1964, report to MIT president Julius Stratton, “before a formal proposal was presented, I went to New York to consult Dr. Piore. One of the first copies of the formal proposal to ARPA was mailed to him and he had been constantly kept informed, either directly or indirectly, of the progress and plans of Project MAC. IBM was strongly represented, more than any other manufacturer, among the invited participants to the 1963 Project MAC Summer Study. There is no question that IBM has had a substantially better opportunity than any other manufacturer to become familiar with our work and to understand our objectives at both the managerial and working levels. If there is a misunderstanding of our objective, I am sure it is not our fault.”*?

Ah, but that was precisely the problem, wasn’t it? It was true that IBMers at every level had been friendly and cooperative with the Proyect MAC team; MIT was a “prestige account,” with a public-relations value to the company that far exceeded the actual dollar value of the machines installed there. It was also true that some IBMers seemed genuinely enthusiastic about what ARPA and Project MAC were trying to accomplish. Nat Rochester at the IBM research lab was a notable example, as were some of the engineers who had helped with the modifications on the project’s 7094. Nonetheless, Corbat6é and his colleagues approached the computer giant with decided ambivalence. They couldn’t shake the sense that they were being patronized, that the vast majority of IBMers still regarded time-sharing as academic self-indulgence having no relevance to the real job of computing, which was to build better batch processors. The steadily increasing stream of visitors to Project MAC had included not a single top executive from IBM. “I think they were very slow in the company to recognize the need for genuine system research,” says Corbato. “The exploration of different kinds of designs was not being done; they thought it was a closed question of how to build machines. They did not recognize that it was an open question.”

Still, says Corbatd, he and his fellow committee members were expecting that attitude. What they weren’t expecting was to find the people at IBM so... anxious. So distracted. The MAC contingent felt as though no one there could really focus on what they were trying to say.

They were right. In early 1964, after signing a raft of nondisclosure agreements and taking a solemn oath of silence, Corbaté, Glaser, Dennis, and Graham were finally let in on the secret: IBM was being convulsed by the biggest gamble in its history. In effect, the company was scrapping every one of its existing computers and replacing them all with a single line of machines that would supposedly accommodate every possible customer. Known as the IBM System/360—for its ability to cover the full circle, so to speak—the new product line was scheduled to debut that very April. It would include smallish machines for small customers, behemoths for big customers, and every size in between; the processing power of the different models would vary by a factor of 50. And yet the upgrade path would be utterly seamless. On the hardware side, every computer in the System/360 line would be assembled from IBM-made solid-state circuits of standardized IBM design. And on the software side, every computer in the line would run the same programs. Indeed, they would all run the same, brand-new operating system, to be known as OS/360. They would likewise offer a brand-new programming language, called PL/1, which would replace Fortran, Cobol, SNOBOL, and the rest for every type of application.

Of course, there was also an obvious potential for disaster with System/360, and the debates within the company had been fierce. After all, dissenters had pointed out, IBM already had two very successful product lines—the 7000-series scientific computers and the 1400-series business computers—both with large cadres of happy customers. Why throw away that advantage by forcing those customers to jump into the unknown, especially when they might just jump to a competitor in the process? Why not simply upgrade and extend the systems that customers had now? If customers ended up liking the System/360 line, then, sure, everyone would be a genius. But if they didn’t—well, two years of single-minded devotion to System/360 development had left the company with very little else to fall back on.

And that was the situation that the MIT foursome so innocently walked into. Indeed, they visited at a time when their IBM counterparts were more anxious and preoccupied than ever. Not long before, Honeywell had come out with a machine that was software-compatible with IBM’s popular 1400 series of business computers, and had begun to make noticeable inroads into IBM’s market share. The resulting agitation in the IBM sales organization had forced the company to move its System/360 announcement up to April 1964, thus giving the engineers roughly a year less than they thought they truly needed to perfect the new system. “They were really in deep trouble,” says Corbatd. And they had precious little time in which to work their way out of it.

Well, the MIT group could empathize with the IBMers’ predicament. But as for the System/360 itself, they were appalled. Yes, System/360 was a beautiful idea in its own way, and a lot of heroic engineering had gone into it. No doubt it would do splendidly in the business market it had been designed for. “But they got fixated on building an engine to support batch processing,” says Corbaté—and in the process, of course, they went in precisely the opposite direction from what the MIT engineers were looking for. In order to achieve compatibility over such a wide range of machines, the System/360 engineers had designed the smallest computer in the lineup to handle data eight bits—or one “byte,” in the IBM jargon—at a time.” (The term “byte” had originated with the IBM 7030 * Today, of course, the eight-bit standard is universal. But there was nothing magic about that number. Many of the System/360 designers had in fact argued for a six-bit standard. This would be sufficient to encode 64 different characters, they said—the minimum required for all the upper- and lower-case letters of the alphabet plus the most common punctuation marks. Eight bits would encode 256 characters, far more than anyone would ever need. It would be a waste of space in the computer’s core memory, then a very expensive commodity. The eight bit contingent prevailed, however, on the ground that the extra two bits would allow for much more flexibility in programming. “Stretch” computer in the late 1950s.) For the more powerful models they simply doubled that, so that the machines would handle sixteen bits at a time. For still more powerful models they doubled that again, to thirty-two bits, and so on up to sixty-four bits at the top of the line.

Now, the MIT team thought this doubling trick was kind of neat, and it certainly simplified the hardware engineering. But once they began to understand what it meant for software, it became all too clear that the rush to announce the new system had taken its toll. “An extremely awkward system to program,” they later called it in their report. “The entire system is very poorly meshed together. [All major design decisions have been] subservient to the demand that the machine language be compatible with the language appropriate for the smallest machine. In spite of this demand, even here the struggle was so great that they did not succeed and many subtleties exist which prevent programs from operating identically on all processors. .. . Finally, the design is an extremely difficult one to learn because of the Byzantine-like detail, exceptions, and ad hoc solutions that exist throughout.”** Building Multics was going to be hard enough in any case; building it for System/360 would be a nightmare.

That wasn’t the worst of it, though. “All through their design,” they wrote, “both in hardware and in programming, [the IBM engineers] seem to have taken the view that a system is a static thing which is only created once and never modified.” In particular, IBM had built in the assumption that each computer would have one and only one processing unit sitting at its center like a spider in a web, with all the memory banks and input-output equipment feeding into it. And indeed, for most business applications, that assumption was perfectly adequate. For the Project MAC representatives, however, it was wrongheaded on two counts. First, because they wanted to create an information utility that would be able to grow and evolve in ways they could not anticipate, they needed a machine that could operate with mamy central processing units at once. Not only would this greatly enhance reliability—since if one processor failed, the others could keep the system running—but it would provide a natural path for expansion: you could just add more processors. With the System/360 design, by contrast, there would be no way to upgrade without replacing the whole computer. Second, because the job of coordinating all those processors would have to be handled by Multics itself, which would reside in the computer’s memory banks, Corbaté and his colleagues were looking for a “memory-centered” architecture. Trying to make the processor centered architecture of System/360 work in that fashion seemed like an exercise in futility.

“We were stupefied,” says Corbato, “because it was apparent that we were watching a locomotive speeding down the tracks. Nothing we could say or do would cause them to deviate from what they were doing. They had too much at stake. They were not able to change [System/360], or were unwilling to change it. And to some extent, they didn’t believe that what we were trying to do mattered that much anyway.”

The upshot was that Corbaté, Glaser, Dennis, and Graham politely thanked their hosts for the information and quietly made plans to look elsewhere. By far the most obvious alternative was DEC. Although the company was a niche-market player that didn’t even rank as a Dwarf in computer manufacturing, Ken Olsen himself was a strong supporter of time-sharing. Better still, DEC already had a time-sharing computer under development. Gordon Bell, the company’s irrepressible chief designer, had taken up the challenge as soon as he heard what MIT was up to. As DEC’s Alan Kotok remembers it, “Gordon came running into the lab one day in nineteen sixty-two, as he was wont to do, and said, ‘Time to build a big computer, guys!’ MIT was looking for a large time-sharing system, and Gordon felt there was no reason that we shouldn’t build one for them. So we started designing what would become the PDP-6.”°*>

That design process was well advanced by the time Corbato, Glaser, Dennis, and Graham came calling. And not surprisingly, they found that the PDP-6’s thirty-six-bit architecture had a lot to recommend it. “It seemed to strike the fancy of every computer hacker who came in contact with it,” said Kotok, an MIT graduate who had been one of the original TX-0 and PDP-1 hackers himself.36 And, of course, the PDP-6 had time-sharing built in from the start; there would be no fighting with the architecture here.

In short, DEC had come up with a beautiful machine, one that might have ended the MIT team’s quest right there—except for one little thing. The PDP-6 was the company’s first zg computer, with a size and complexity comparable to those of IBM’s heftiest mainframes. And it had become painfully clear that DEC had gotten in way over its head. Certainly the company wasn’t yet ready to make the kind of commitment Project MAC needed. As it was, says Kotok, “we built a few [PDP-6s] and sold a few, but none of them ever worked right. There were a lot of flaky electrical signal problems—a static discharge from the line printer would crash the system, the memory would die, things like that. It was hard to get up and running for more than a few hours or so. It was a great embarrassment.”*’

Happily, the PDP-6 would turn out to be a useful learning experience. Its creators would go on to design the very successful PDP-10, which they thought of as “a PDP-6 done right”—and which would ultimately become the time-sharing computer of choice for the ARPA community in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In the meantime, just as happily, DEC donated the PDP-6 prototype to Marvin Minsky’s AI Lab. This eased the tension with the rest of Proyect MAC considerably, since the hackers there fell in love with the new machine and generally left off their depredations on CTSS. Now that they had a computer all to themselves, they could go their own way in splendid isolation, refusing to be part of any community but their own. (When they later wrote a time-sharing system for the PDP-6, they pointedly mocked CTSS, the Compatible Time-Sharing System, by calling their version ITS: the Jzcompatible Time-sharing System. As befitting the information-wants-to-be-free hacker culture, ITS was completely open, with no passwords—indeed, no file protection whatsoever.)

However, all that was in the future, and of no help to Corbato and company in early 1964. So it was on to the Seven Dwarfs.

“The responses varied,” says Corbato. “Some companies viewed it as an opportunity to bid [the way they would] on a military defense contract. That is, they would build computers if the military thought it needed them—but just as a way to make money on the margin, rather than affecting any of their own product plans.” Other companies weren’t even that polite. At the Control Data Corporation in Minneapolis, a six-year-old firm that was then making quite a splash in the scientific number-crunching market, chief designer Seymour Cray walked out of the MIT group’s presentation in contempt. “We found similar attitudes in most hardware designers, if not quite so extreme,” says Corbato. “They all had their own vision of what a computer ought to be, and that didn’t include the social environment of [multiple] people trying to use the computer all at once. They really didn’t want to be bothered with somebody introducing new ideas.”

It was beginning to look like IBM or nothing. The IBM public-relations operation pulled out all the stops. Press kits, information packets, and advertising campaigns were prepared for all six of the new processor models and all forty-four of the brand-new peripheral devices that would go with them. Announcements were sent to some one hundred thousand IBM customers and prospective customers, inviting them to presentations in 165 branch offices throughout the country. A special train was hired to bring some two hundred writers and editors up to Poughkeepsie for a mass press conference. And on Tuesday, April 7, 1964, IBM System/360 was presented to the world. “Today we are making the most significant product announcement in IBM history,” Tom Watson declared. “This is the beginning of a new generation—not only of computers—but of their applications in business, science, and government.”°®

It was the beginning for everyone, that is, except IBM’s prospective customers in Tech Square. Other than the private show-and-tell they’d been given several months earlier, Corbaté and his companions hadn’t heard a word about how (or if) IBM’s new equipment could help Project MAC. Indeed, as Bob Fano would write in his June 29 report to Julius Stratton, it wasn’t until two weeks after the System/360 announcement that they finally thought they might see some action: “We were visited on April 20, 1964 by a group of IBM people, including Dr. Amdahl, for what I thought was a first presentation of equipment configurations that might be of interest to us.” Now, this was the big time: the forty-one-year-old Gene Amdahl had been a chief architect of System/360. His presence at Project MAC could be read as a measure of how prestigious this Prestige Account really was. But alas, wrote Fano, “I was very shocked to realize at that time that nobody of any consequence had yet given any thought to our problems.”>?

In fairness, the frazzled IBMers had only just had a chance to catch their collective breath after getting their new product to the finish line. Still, says Jack Dennis, who had had long private conversations about Project MAC’s needs with Amdahl and others, it was as if they couldn’t listen anymore: “They looked at it as, ‘Oh, you want to do time-sharing? You’ve got all this government money to do time-sharing? Sure, our machine is good for that.’ Or maybe to say it more accurately, “We are determined to prove to you that our machine is good for that, because our machine is the best one that we could possibly build.’ ”

Fano could see that this was far more than a technical disagreement. “I do know from many sources that the design of the new line of IBM equipment was the subject of very strong controversies within IBM, that left very deep wounds,” he later wrote to Stratton. “Some of the designers, and Dr. Amdahl in particular, ended up in assuming very rigid positions, that they are not emotionally free of abandoning.”*° On top of that, he added, the IBM delegation had told him that Project MAC could not expect delivery of any new equipment until the middle of 1966—a slippage of eight months from previous estimates.

Fearing that the situation was shaping up to be a disaster, Fano and Corbato arranged to meet with IBM’s chief scientist, Emmanuel Piore, in New York on May 11, in hopes that he could somehow make something move. They certainly didn’t have any leverage they could use on the company. But they had to try.

Fate, as if on cue, proceeded to hand them a lever.

Right in the middle of this turmoil, Joe Weizenbaum mentioned that he’d just paid a visit to his former colleagues at General Electric. “He’d found out there that they were planning to have a commercial version of a military machine they’d developed,” says Fano, “and he thought we ought to look at it, because it had many of the features we wanted.” So in late April, shortly after the Amdahl visit, Jack Dennis and Ted Glaser flew out to the GE plant in Phoenix to see what was really going on.

They came back with stars in their eyes: the GE 635, as it was known, was remarkably close to what they were looking for. Just as important, the company was remarkably receptive to a partnership. “When we visited GE,” says Jack Dennis, “the responsible engineer [for the GE 635 computer] was John Couleur, who understood the nature of what we expected from the hardware and realized that the 635 was as close as anything in the industry to it. He was willing almost immediately to start thinking about how they could make the machine better for us, which was very different from IBM’s approach.”

The news put stars in Corbatd’s eyes as well. “They were naive and we were naive,” he says with a laugh, looking back on his younger self. “We all thought we could do more than we could.” Nonetheless, he and Fano could now meet with Piore on May 11 feeling confident that IBM was no longer the only game in town. “I made a point to convey this fact to Dr. Piore,” Fano wrote, “of course without mentioning the company’s name because some of the information I had was still regarded as company-confidential.” Piore apparently believed that Fano’s alternative was DEC, a company he would have had trouble taking seriously. Nonetheless, he took Fano’s point; until that moment, he had assumed that the Project MAC account was in the bag. As Fano would later explain to Stratton, Piore immediately ordered his subordinates “to see to it that an appropriate team would get to work immediately on a specific proposal to meet Project MAC’s needs.”

And that was what happened. In early June, a team of IBM engineers camped out at Project MAC for a week, talking to everybody. Then they disappeared until June 23, when they submitted their formal proposal.

It was the disaster the MAC group had been braced for all along, says Corbato: more of the same, warmed over. Once the IBMers realized they had a competitor, he says, “their immediate reaction was, “We have got to save this account.’ But that was one of the problems: they kept thinking of us as an account rather than as a coparticipant in a new kind of product. That reflected the marketing viewpoint of the company. As a result they ordered all the engineers to do something to make MIT happy. So what they did was build a Rube Goldberg-like offering, which they then priced accordingly—namely, pretty high. But what they were shoving at us was just hopelessly flawed, starting with some deep design decisions that had been made inside the 360. They had been misled by their senior designers to believe that the 360 was good for everything. That just wasn’t true, but the company wanted to believe it. Yet the only way to satisfy us would have been to embark on a new product design which was different from the 360. So we got into this impasse.”

The result was Fano’s letter to Stratton on June 29, which was basically intended to give the MIT president a storm warning: Brace yourself. And on July 15, 1964, Fano and his colleagues announced that their next-generation information utility would be created in partnership with the General Electric Company.

The storm exploded immediately.

In hindsight, it’s true, IBM had nothing to worry about. Within the first four weeks after its launch, the company had received well over a thousand orders for System/360, far beyond its most optimistic forecasts; corporate data managers who had been tearing their hair over every machine upgrade absolutely loved the idea of software compatibility. Within the first five years, IBM’s worldwide inventory of installed computers would more than triple, to an estimated $24 billion worth. And within the first decade or so, it would become clear that the introduction of System/360 had been one of the watersheds of computer history—the beginning of an era that would see computers integrated into every major corporation and every major government operation in the industrialized world. The Dwarfs would prosper as well, of course. But System/360 and its successors—most notably System/370, in 1970—would become de facto standard architecture for mainframes well into the 1990s, in much the same way that the Macintosh and IBM PC would later become the standard architectures for personal computers. (Indeed, they would even inspire a market for “clones,” work alike mainframes from other manufacturers.) And of course, System/360 would popularize such terms as “byte,” along with the convention of encoding data eight bits at a time.

But all that was later. In the summer of 1964, the flood of orders was just one more reason for anxiety: with delivery of the machines promised for 1965, IBM had yet to prove that it could even build the things. Its new manufacturing plants were still plagued by start-up problems, particularly when it came to System/360’s new “Solid Logic Technology” transistor modules. Worse, the system software was a mess. At the announcement, in April, IBM had promised that the first version of OS/360 would be available by the end of 1965, and that through the selective omission of various bells and whistles, it would run on System/360 processors with as little as sixteen kilobytes of memory. By summer, however, with the programmers falling further and further behind schedule every day, it was clear that the planners had grossly underestimated the magnitude of the task. Indeed, OS/360 would eventually go down in history as one of computerdom’s classic horror stories, just as project chief Fred Brooks’s rueful meditation on the lessons he’d drawn from that experience, The Mythical Man-Month,*' would go down as one of the classics of the software-engineering literature. The OS/360 that he and his team finally managed to deliver, in 1966, would be late, slow, and a memory hog; much of the work in subsequent releases would be devoted to fixing its deficiencies. In the meantime, moreover, IBM would be forced to renege on its promise of a universal operating system and develop three much simpler systems for its low-end machines: BOS, TOS, and DOS (respectively, the Basic, Tape, and Disk Operating Systems).

And now, right in the middle of this chaos, came Project MAC’s defection to General Electric-the one competitor that IBM truly feared. GE was a huge, diversified conglomerate that manufactured everything from jet engines to household appliances. Its pockets were deep; indeed, its annual revenues were several times larger than IBM’s. Its research and development organizations were world-class. It had the wherewithal to buy its way into any market it really wanted to enter. And of late it seemed that GE really wanted to enter the computer market. The company had already made considerable inroads in banking applications; now it appeared to be going after the “prestige accounts.” The word was that Ohio State University and the University of Michigan were both considering GE machines, as were the computer people at Bell Labs. To IBM management, in the summer of 1964, it seemed very possible that MIT’s decision would trigger an academic avalanche toward GE, thereby costing IBM its market leadership in scientific computing.

IBM management did not take kindly to losing market leadership.

Mannie Piore, in a recent interview, insisted that he’d actually breathed a sigh of relief when he heard that MIT was going with General Electric instead of DEC. But that’s not the story they heard at Project MAC. “When word got out that the real competitor was GE,” says Fano, “Watson called Mannie on the carpet and was real upset about it. “You’re supposed to be the contact with MIT. How could this happen?’ So Mannie came to talk to Stratton and really blew his top.” After all IBM had done for it, how could MIT be so disloyal?

Stratton, to his credit, refused to second-guess his own people. Nonetheless, Piore was not the only one asking that question around MIT. Corbatd was obliged to give up his post as deputy director of the Computation Center, where most of the staff was still quite loyal to its longtime benefactor. And for years thereafter, he says, his relations with his former colleagues remained wary, if friendly: “I became known as one of the people who had let IBM down.”

But there was worse to come, at least from IBM’s standpoint. “Quickly after our decision to go with GE,” says Fano, “Bell Labs decided to join us [in developing Multics]. So it became a three-way partnership. And when that happened, IBM hit the ceiling. Then the next thing that happened was that Lincoln Lab put out a request for proposals on a new computing system with the spec that it had to be time-shared—in exactly the same way Multics was. So IBM decided they had to have that contract. They couldn’t afford to lose again.”

Orders came down from the top: create a time-sharing computer for the System/360 line, starting from the System/360 architecture. This was a measure of just how nervous the top brass really were about GE, notes Corbato. As any engineer could have told them, adapting a 360 for time-sharing was going to require such deep, deep engineering changes that the result would barely be a 360 anymore. But then, no one seems to have objected too strongly; insufficient enthusiasm for System/360 had terminated more than one IBMer’s career already.

Thus was born the System/360 Model 67, IBM’s answer to General Electric. “They rushed to create a competitive product because they thought we would create a product,” says Corbato, still shaking his head at the folly of the move. And the irony of it was that most of IBM’s work on Model 67 was concentrated at the IBM Cambridge Scientific Center, located night at 545 Technology Square, just a few floors below Project MAC. THE FATHER OF IT ALL In the long rebellion against batch processing, and against the authoritarian mind-set that went with it, Project MAC’s break with IBM was about as close as things ever got to open warfare. Yet J. C. R. Licklider—the commander in chief, so to speak—kept his distance from the fray. The choice of a next-generation computer was Tech Square’s to make, he felt. And besides, why get involved with that battle when he was preparing to infiltrate the enemy lines all by himself? In mid-1964, at about the same time that Fano and company were deciding on the GE 635, IBM chief scientist Mannie Piore had invited Lick to join IBM’s research division, headquartered at the new Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, New York. And Lick had accepted.

With the correspondence long gone and memories hazy at best, it’s hard to know exactly what Lick’s intentions were—or Piore’s, either, for that matter. Piore himself now maintains that the invitation had nothing to do with Project MAC; he was simply on the lookout for outstanding talent. And indeed, that would have been very much in character. The Russian-born physicist had taken over as IBM’s first director of research in September 1956 and had spent the intervening years building an organization with world-class capabilities in solid-state physics, mathematics, superconductivity, and a host of other fields. (In the process, he had also consolidated many of IBM’s scattered research activities at the Yorktown Heights site, some twenty-five miles north of Manhattan; the laboratory building, designed by Eero Saarinen, opened its doors in April 1961.) Nevertheless, the coincidence was striking. Given the embarrassment of losing Project MAC to GE, Piore could hardly be blamed if he saw hiring Lick as an effective way to acquire some in-house expertise in interactive computing.

As for Lick, he may simply have felt that it was time for him to move on. The tradition was for ARPA program directors to step down after two or three years in any case, to make room for new people with new ideas. Then, too, with two teenagers who would soon be starting college, Lick can’t have been entirely unaware of IBM’s lavish salary scale. Nor could he ignore how stressful Washington had been for his family. Louise had been forced to give up an apprenticeship at the Arena Stage, which she loved, and put her theater career on indefinite hold; with two children at home, a husband who was always on the road, and rehearsals at night, scheduling had become a nightmare. Tracy and Linda, meanwhile, had had a rough time adjusting to school. Their parents had innocently enrolled them in private school before they arrived, since a commitment had to be made and Lick had not yet located a place for the family to live. But to their horror, the school had turned out to be a segregation academy: pristine white, very conservative, and run by not-very-bright retired colonels. (Tracy, in particular, loathed the place. In the Cambridge public schools, he had been going through the fast track science curriculum ever since Sputnik. And now this? Never mind that his classmates had elected him president of his class for the next year; he refused to go back, announcing that the Arlington public school system was good enough for him, “mixed races” and all.)

While all these considerations undoubtedly influenced Lick, however, what really seems to have persuaded him was the opportunity: at IBM he could preach the gospel of interactive computing in the very high temple of batch processing. If he could convert IBM to the cause, he often rhapsodized to Louise— if he could get even a fraction of that immense marketing power behind the vision of human-computer symbiosis—then he would be one giant step closer to converting the world.

In any case, the plan was for Lick to start at Yorktown Heights in September 1964, which left the problem of what to do about his command-and-control program at ARPA. Under Jack Ruina, who had left the agency in September 1963, and Ruina’s successor, the physicist Robert Sproull, Lick had had the freedom to turn that program into a visionary quest for human-computer symbiosis. In fact, he had taken it so far in that direction that ARPA had felt obliged to give it a new name: the Information Processing Techniques Office, or IPTO. Lick was well aware, though, that his own successor was going to have exactly as much freedom as he himself had had—which meant that he had to get the nght person in place, or his whole movement could collapse.

Fortunately, one of ARPA’s traditions was that outgoing office directors were allowed to recruit their own successors; all Lick had to do was to come up with an experienced, senior person with good credentials, and everybody would be happy. So Lick, characteristically, nominated a totally inexperienced and very junior candidate whose credentials were about the most awkward and inconvenient conceivable in the Pentagon. He was a skinny, intense fellow named Ivan Sutherland. He was twenty-six years old. And at the time he was a first lieutenant in the army.

It wasn’t that he hadn’t tried to find someone more senior, Lick protested in his 1988 interview; it was just that the answers he’d gotten ranged from “No!” to “Hell, No!” “Most of my colleagues would much rather spend the government money doing research back in the lab than coast another year or two or three in Washington,” he said.

Still, you have to wonder how hard Lick really did try; the truth was, he’d had his eye on Lieutenant Sutherland for a long while. When they'd first met, the younger man was still an MIT graduate student finishing up his Ph.D. work under Claude Shannon. The subject of his dissertation was a computer graphics program he had created on the TX-2 computer out at Lincoln Lab. Sutherland called it Sketchpad.

Now, Lick had always loved graphics. Indeed, he considered high-resolution graphics to be as critical to human-computer symbiosis as communications or even real-time interactivity. Humans are visual animals, he would muse to anyone who would listen. Our eyes are “a high-bandwidth data channel” capable of absorbing information at the equivalent of millions of bits per second. Our brains are organized to recognize patterns and sense complex relationships at a glance. In fact, as Lick told Oliver Selfridge and Marvin Minsky over dinner one evening, he felt that once they got time-sharing working well, ARPA’s next two major initiatives should be graphics and networking. That was why he had funded the RAND Tablet, and why he had been so adamant that the Kludge and other graphics applications be included in Project MAC.

But Sketchpad had been a revelation. “In 1962,” Lick would later write, “at the Spring Joint Computer Conference in San Francisco, during the discussion period of a session on man-computer communication chaired by Douglas Engelbart, Ivan Sutherland mentioned his Sketchpad program and, at the end of the session, showed to a few lingering enthusiasts the most dramatic on-line graphical compositions that any of them had ever seen.”

To modern eyes Sketchpad would look quite familiar—like a computer-aided design system, perhaps, or a high-end drawing package. But that’s only because Sutherland himself single-handedly pioneered most of the techniques that are now used in such programs. Touch two points on the TX-2’s little display screen with a light pen, and the computer would draw a straight line between them. Draw a rough curve with the pen, and the computer would “correct” the curve and smooth it out. Indicate that two components were attached at a given point, and the computer would ensure that they stayed that way, no matter how you moved or rotated them.

Lick was enthralled. It was as if his whole vision of symbiosis were coming to life before his eyes: dynamic modeling as it was meant to be. From then on he would point to Sketchpad as the program that had done more than any other single thing to convince the world that interactive computing was worthwhile. And from that day on, of course, Lick had kept close tabs on Sketchpad’s creator.

Sutherland had never participated in Project MAC, unfortunately; after receiving his Ph.D., in January 1963, he’d been obliged to go straight into the army due to an ROTC commitment left over from his undergraduate days at Carnegie Tech. Still, when the time came for Lick to nominate his own successor, he didn’t hesitate. So what if Sutherland was young? “Ivan was a true believer in the things I was a believer in,” Lick explained, “and, in my view, he was better at [them].”

Actually, Sutherland himself hadn’t been so sure about the ARPA job at first, but after some genial arm-twisting from Lick, he’d agreed to try it. So had ARPA. “I had lots of talks with Sproull, Charlie Herzfeld, and several of the others, about how it was going to be possible for such a young guy to make it in the Pentagon,” Lick says. Until Sutherland finished his term of service in early 1965, the protocol of having a first lieutenant run a program in the Pentagon was going to be delicate, to say the least (among other things, he would need a new deputy; Buck Cleven was a colonel, and you couldn’t have a colonel reporting to a lieutenant). But the effort was well worth it, Lick would insist in 1988: “I think maybe the best thing I did was to pick my successor. Ivan was surely more brilliant than I, and very effective. He carried it on.” In the late summer of 1964, just a few days before Lick was due to depart for IBM, his office at the Pentagon finally took delivery of the first tangible evidence of his efforts: a Teletype console that would let him hook into the time-sharing systems at Berkeley, SDC, and Project MAC. Alas, he later recalled, he didn’t have much time to use it himself—“but when Ivan Sutherland succeeded me, he had a steady stream of military people coming to play with that console, including generals and admirals. He found that he had to put it in a little room that was big enough for just one person, because if an admiral was sitting at the console, and there were junior officers looking, the admiral was afraid to move his fingers for fear he’d reveal he didn’t know what to do!”

As tangible output, one Teletype terminal wasn’t much, perhaps. But then, Lick never claimed to have accomplished much at ARPA-—certainly not much that he could actually take credit for. “I went for one year and stayed for two,” he said in his 1988 interview, “and the time scale for doing anything significant is longer than that. So I had to buy into things and finish them and make them demonstrable, so that there would be something for people to look at without realizing that I didn’t do them. ONR [the Office of Naval Research] had had Corby [Corbatd] started on the time-sharing system and the Computation Center, and then we came along and greatly increased the speed with which that project was going. But we could never have started it and gotten it going. Berkeley hadn’t started time-sharing, but they had a laboratory and a computer and everything else, so the time-sharing part was relatively simple. They had a time-sharing system [Project Genie] running before I left. The SDC time-sharing system ran before I left Washington, but they had a hundred or two hundred programmers working before I got there. We were just responsible for channeling that a bit. So I think that there’s nothing I can point to with pride and say, ‘I did that.’ ”

Lick did have a point: little was happening at the end of his ARPA term that hadn’t already been under way when he started. And yet in a larger sense, he was also selling himself woefully short in this account—not unusual for him. “When you look at Lick’s legacy, two very distinct things stand out,” says Bob Fano. “One is that he was a very imaginative, creative psychoacoustics man. That’s the first part of his history, and you shouldn’t overlook that.” Because Lick had come to computing from psychology, Fano explains—instead of through mathematics and engineering, like almost everyone else—he instinctively saw computers in relation to the workings of the human brain, rather than as an exercise in pure technology. And that, in turn, was why he was so quick to embrace computers as a way of enhancing human creativity and enriching human life. “It was a vision of man-machine interaction that was often unhampered by practical realities,” says Fano, who had many an argument with Lick on that very point. “But he really had an understanding of the role the computer could play.”

Second, says Fano, when Lick was presented with a miraculous, never-to-berepeated opportunity to turn his vision into reality, he had the guts to go for it, and the skills to make it work. Lick had the power to spin his dreams so persuasively that Jack Ruina and company were willing to go along with him—and to trust him with the Pentagon’s money. Once he had that money in hand, moreover, Lick had the taste to recognize and cultivate good ideas wherever he found them. Indeed, the ideas he fostered in 1962 would ultimately lay the foundations for computing as we know it today. The time-sharing technology he pushed so relentlessly would turn out to be the evolutionary ancestor of both personal computing and local-area networking, as well as a test bed for all the issues of on-line social behavior that would reemerge a generation later. The computer-graphics experiments he funded so lovingly would likewise turn out to be important steps along the road to our current generation of high-resolution computer displays with their windows, icons, menus, and so on. And of course, Lick’s vision of an Intergalactic Network would be the direct inspiration for the Arpanet of the late 1960s, which would in turn evolve into the Internet of the 1990s.

Perhaps most important of all, however, Lick had the patience to take the long view. He couldn’t get it all done in one year, or two years, or a lifetime. But by creating a community of fellow believers, he guaranteed that his vision would live on after him. When he arrived at ARPA, in October 1962, there was nothing more to “symbiotic” computing than a handful of uncoordinated development efforts scattered all across the country; by the time he left, in September 1964, he had forged those efforts into a nationwide movement that had direction, coherence, and purpose. Moreover, by putting so much of the agency’s money into research at universities, where most of it actually went to support students, he neatly co-opted a substantial portion of the rising generation. “It seems to me that Licklider and ARPA were mainly about winning the hearts and minds of a generation of young scientists and convincing them that computer science was an exciting thing to do,” says James Morris, chair of Carnegie Mellon’s computer science department. “Remember, in the aftermath of Sputnik, the glamour field was physics, not computing. Lots of very smart people made a career decision to go into a field that didn’t exist yet, simply because ARPA was pouring money into it.”

Indeed, in his 1988 interview, that was the one accomplishment for which Lick was willing to take credit: “I think that I found a lot of bright people and got them working in this area,” he said. “I got it moving. [And it was] a fantastic community. I guess that’s the word. It was more than just a collection of bright people. It was a thing that organized itself into a community, so that there was some competition and some cooperation, and it resulted in the emergence of a field.”
