---
book: "The Dream Machine: J.C.R. Licklider and the Revolution That Made Computing Personal"
author: "M. Mitchell Waldrop"
part: "Lick’s Kids"
source_pages: "411–472"
type: source
---

# Lick’s Kids

It took some getting used to, says Tim Anderson, thinking back to the mid-1970s and his time as an MIT computer-science student. But as often as not, you’d walk into the Tech Square terminal room and there he’d be: Professor J. C. R. Licklider, hacking away like a computer-struck freshman.

“He signed up for his two hours like everybody else,” marvels Anderson, who had started there while Lick was away on his second ARPA tour and who had therefore never seen a sixtyish full professor typing code with his own ten fingers. “You'd come in and find this old guy sitting there with a bottle of Coke and a brownie. And it wasn’t even a good brownie; he’d be eating one of those vending-machine things as if that was a perfectly satisfactory lunch. Then I also remember that he had these funny-colored glasses with yellow lenses; he had some theory that they helped him see better.”

Anderson was never too clear about what Lick was working on—something to do with making computer code as intuitive as ordinary conversation, and as easy as drawing a sketch. Anyway, it never panned out: when it came to programming, Lick had great ideas but terrible execution. But that almost didn’t matter. The father of us all: Lick with MIT students during the late 1970s To Lick, as Anderson soon realized, the important thing was to have fun with computers, to keep on pushing toward the future.

Being Lick, of course, he never said a word about what he’d done to bring computing into the future with him; a student had to pick up that bit of background through the grapevine. “When you learned what he had done, it was awesome,” says Anderson. “He was clearly the father of us all. But you’d never know it from talking to him. Instead, there was always a sense that he was playing.”

Always. “Lick was intellectually as alive as anybody could be,” remembers Bob Kahn, who had seen those blue eyes twinkling often enough at ARPA, even through the worst of Lick’s struggles with George Heilmeier. “There was not a topic you could raise that he hadn’t sifted and sorted in his mind many times. And he was always conjuring up scenarios. ‘Suppose we had one of these, and some of that, then we’d get something interesting over there, wouldn’t we?’ He’d come up with ideas that way that would knock your socks off, like his proof that the world couldn’t possibly be a cosmic computer simulation: if it were, then surely God would have discovered a bug like Nixon and fixed it! And then he was always asking dialogue questions. This whole idea of interactivity was part of his demeanor. If you asked him something, he’d come back with, ‘Well, have you heard of XYZ? Doesn’t that bear on your question? What do you think about that?’ You couldn’t interact with him without participating.”

Admittedly, Lick’s scenario-spinning qualities had driven many people to distraction over the years, and not just Heilmeier. To anyone craving crisp analysis and decisive action, he could come across as an amiable doofus. But now that he was safely out of office, so to speak, those same qualities made him much in demand as a wise man. At the invitation of Bob Taylor, for example, Lick regularly went out to PARC and wandered through the computer labs as a visiting guru. He likewise served on the Committee on Government Relations of the Association of Computing Machinery; the Advisory Committee on the MIT Library System (as chairman); the Panel on the Social Security Administration’s Data Management System (deputy chairman); and on and on. In 1978 he even spent another year in Washington, as a member of a task force examining the government’s data-processing needs—part of the Carter administration’s attempt at government reorganization.

Back in his natural habitat of Tech Square, meanwhile, he had reverted to being Lick at his best: not functioning as a manager and paper pusher, a role in which he was a disaster, but serving as visionary, teacher, mentor, and friend. “Lick became very important to me after I became director,” says Michael Dertouzos, the Athens-born computer scientist who was named head of Project MAC after Ed Fredkin stepped down in 1974. The transition years were pretty stressful, says Dertouzos. If nothing else, there was the name change: Project MAC was now LCS, the Laboratory for Computer Science. (The argument was that with Multics as finished as it would ever be, and with the Tech Square crowd’s moving on to a variety of new activities, neither “Multi-Access Computer” nor “Machine-Assisted Cognition” reflected what they were actually doing now.) Then, too, the faculty members were being their usual helpful selves. “In a place like MIT, nobody, but zobody, will tell you that you’re doing a good job,” says Dertouzos. “Lick was the only one who understood the loneliness, the only one who would come to me, regularly, after every meeting, and say, ‘Mike, you’re doing a great job.’ So he gave me a kind of paternal reinforcement, a sense of someone’s having faith in me.”

Lick did much the same for the students in his Dynamic Modeling group. “I always felt that he liked and respected me,” says Tim Anderson, “even though he had no reason to: I was no smarter than anybody else. I think everybody in the group felt that way, and that was a big part of what made the group the way it was.” Lick was definitely the spiritual and intellectual leader, agrees Al Vezza, who was now the titular leader. Lick somehow made his people feel that by playing around and having fun with computers, they were actually building something much larger than themselves. He would happily sit for hours, spinning visions of graphical computing, digital libraries, on-line banking and E-commerce, software that would live on the network and move wherever it was needed, a mass migration of government, commerce, entertainment, and daily life into the on-line world—possibilities that were just mind-blowing in the 1970s.

Let’s be optimists, he wrote in 1979, on one of those rare occasions when he committed such a scenario to paper.* Let’s assume that Moore’s law will continue to work its magic as it has in the past, and now let’s imagine ourselves in the year 2000: “Waveguides, optical fibers, rooftop satellite antennae, and coaxial cables provide abundant bandwidth and inexpensive digital transmission both locally and over long distances. Computer consoles with good graphic display and speech input and output have become almost as common as television sets.”!

Great. But what would all those gadgets add up to, Lick wondered, other than a bigger pile of gadgets? Well, he said, if we continued to be optimists and assumed that all this technology was connected so that the bits flowed freely, then it might actually add up to an electronic commons open to all, as “the main and essential medium of informational interaction for governments, institutions, corporations, and individuals.” Indeed, he went on, looking back from the imagined viewpoint of the year 2000, “[the electronic commons] has supplanted the postal system for letters, the dial-tone phone system for conversations and teleconferences, stand-alone batch-processing and time-sharing systems for compu* The occasion was a series of essays on the future of computing, collected by Mike Dertouzos and his deputy Joel Moses and published as The Computer Age: A Twenty-Year View. Lick’s forty-page chapter, entitled “Computers and Government,” was one of the longest in the book. In addition to his fantasy about the Multinet/Internet, it included a very thorough overview of the policy issues raised by information technology—an analysis that stands up pretty well today. Among other things, Lick looked at the pros and cons of export controls on sensitive technology, the need to ensure privacy in a networked environment, the need to protect essential facilities from hacker attack, and the challenge of providing equitable access for the poor as well as the rich. tation, and most filing cabinets, microfilm repositories, document rooms and libraries for information storage and retrieval.”

This vision of the “Multinet,” as Lick called it—the term “Internet” didn’t really exist yet—was his synthesis of all the thinking and talking and writing that had gone on about the on-line world within the ARPA community since his “Symbiosis” paper in 1960. The Multinet would permeate society, Lick wrote, thus achieving the old MIT dream of an information utility, as updated for the decentralized network age: “Many people work at home, interacting with coworkers and clients through the Multinet, and many business offices (and some classrooms) are little more than organized interconnections of such home workers and their computers. People shop through the Multinet, using its cable television and electronic funds transfer functions, and a few receive delivery of small items through adjacent pneumatic tube networks... . Routine shopping and appointment scheduling are generally handled by private-secretary-like programs called OLIVERs which know their masters’ needs. Indeed, the Multinet handles scheduling of almost everything schedulable. For example, it eliminates waiting to be seated at restaurants.” Thanks to ironclad guarantees of privacy and security, Lick added, the Multinet would likewise offer on-line banking, online stock-market trading, on-line tax payment—the works.

In short, Lick wrote, the Multinet would encompass essentially everything having to do with information. It would function as a network of networks that embraced every method of digital communication imaginable, from packet radio to fiber optics—and then bound them all together through the magic of the Kahn-Cerf internetworking protocol, or something very much like it. It would be open in precisely the same way that Fernando Corbaté’s Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) had been: anyone could join, and everyone could participate. Indeed, monolithic central control of the Multinet would be impossible, if only because its on-line data sources would be distributed so widely that no central authority could ever hope to keep up with them. Instead, Lick predicted, its mode of operation would be “one featuring cooperation, sharing, meetings of minds across space and time in a context of responsive programs and readily available information.” The Multinet would be the worldwide embodiment of equality, community, and freedom.

If that is, the Multinet ever came to be.

That concern seems a bit mystifying nowadays, since Lick’s vision of the Multinet was only a slight exaggeration of what the Internet has in fact become in the new millennium (except for a few items such as the pneumatic-tube network, which Lick may have meant as a joke anyway; his OLIVER, of course, would now be called an agent). It seems even more mystifying when you consider that from a purely technological point of view, all the essential components of the Internet were already in place by then: personal computers, local-area networking, packet switching, internetworking protocols—everything.

And yet the reality was that the Multinet/Internet was still a very tentative proposition in 1979. Lick found it all too easy to imagine an alternative scenario in which all his optimistic assumptions would fail to materialize—a technological future in which “the year 2000 is new sheet metal on a souped-up 1970s chassis.” For example:

¢ “IBM explores many new concepts and technologies but preserves

functional compatibility with its established systems... . It stays

out of the computer communication service field because it fears

that initiatives there might attract government regulation to other

parts of its business.”

¢ “The Bell System offers point-to-point and dialed digital transmission services but not packet-switched services, which it seems to

consider more a threat than an opportunity, as do the European

national telecommunication authorities.”

¢ “Electronic message systems have not replaced mail... because

there were too many uncoordinated governmental and commercial networks, with no network at all reaching people’s homes.”

¢ “Controlled sharing of information in [government] computer

systems and networks has been neglected because the military,

diplomatic, and intelligence people (who control most of the govermment’s computer development funds) want to maintain their

exclusive secrecy.”

¢ “Social Security, Internal Revenue, law enforcement, and the census are the major non-defense users of computers [in the government]. They share the cost of maintaining the National Roster, the

ultimate personnel data base with a file for every person, natural or

corporate.”°

Under this scenario, in sum, we would collectively stumble our way toward a fragmented, parochial, Big Brotherish kind of information system “characterized by supervision, regulation, constraint, and control.” Moreover, given his view of the world in 1979, Lick had to rate this possibility as far more likely than his optimistic projection. An integrated, open, universally accessible Multinet wouldn’t just happen on its own, he pointed out. It would require cooperation and effort on a time scale of decades, “a long, hard process of deliberate study, experiment, analysis, and development.” That process, in turn, could be sustained only by the forging of a collective vision, some rough consensus on the part of thousands or maybe even millions of people that an open electronic commons was worth having. And shat, wrote Lick, would require leadership.

Good luck. The pessimistic scenario, in contrast, would require nothing more than laissez faire: “[It] can merely evolve under the pressure of economic competition and the criterion of local gain.” He did not underestimate the private sector’s ability to innovate, Lick insisted; rather, he questioned its ability to cooperate, especially for the sake of some ill-defined “electronic commons” whose payoff was nebulous, iffy, and still ten to twenty years away.

Take the situation in commercial networking as an example. The good news was that the market was flourishing. BBN’s Telenet subsidiary (which would be sold to GTE in June 1979) had been offering an Arpanetlike networking service since 1974. IBM had simultaneously introduced its Systems Network Architecture, a proprietary packet-switching technology that allowed customers to interconnect their IBM mainframes. DEC had followed in 1975 with DECnet, its own proprietary packet-switching system, modeled in part on Arpanet. Xerox was planning to weigh in with Xerox Network Services, based on Metcalfe and Bogg’s PARC Universal Protocol. And others were coming as well.

The bad news was that “open” wasn’t even an option with these commercial networks. Not only were the various systems incompatible, but the vendors had no incentive to make them compatible—or to implement anything like the TCP/IP internetworking protocol, which would provide a kind of translation service among the networks. The vendors were primarily targeting Fortune 500-scale corporations that wanted proprietary networks for in-house use and that were endlessly paranoid about security leaks and industrial espionage; isolation was actually a selling point for such customers. And the fact that this isolation also short-circuited any possibility of E-commerce, E-banking, or anything else that required an electronic commons—well, it’s hard to miss something you've never experienced.

Meanwhile, that long, hard process of deliberate study, et cetera, wasn’t doing much better—not in Tech Square, anyway. You couldn’t even get people interested in the problem, says Mike Dertouzos with a sigh. And God knows he tried often enough.

He and Lick had been independently thinking along the same lines, as it turned out. “I’d never liked time-sharing,” Dertouzos explains. “Maybe it was the Greek in me, but it seemed like a socialist kind of sharing, with central control, like forcing everyone to ride a bus as opposed to driving a personal automobile. And I’d never liked the information-utility notion, which I first heard from Fano. Information isn’t natural gas. It doesn’t come from one place, or a few places. It comes from all over. It’s much more of a commodity. But now, with the networks, we were moving away from a centralized-brain metaphor to a system without centralized control—a heterarchy. So in nineteen seventy-six or so I was looking for a metaphor for how the machines in such a system would interact with each other. Being Greek, I thought of the Athens flea market, where I used to spend every Sunday, and I envisioned an on-line version: a community with very large numbers of people coming together in a place where they could buy, sell, and exchange information. So every year I would push this information-marketplace idea to the lab members. And every year I would get lots of negative reaction. One, it was too far out conceptually. For most of them, it seemed completely far-fetched to go beyond the log-in/log-out interface for networking and try to establish some broader concepts. And two, the on-line marketplace just didn’t seem like it was computer science; it was more a fruity sociopolitical thing. It wasn’t so much that they fought the idea. It was more like—suppose we had just invented the car, and I was asking them to study the social implications when they were still focused on the engine and trying to make it go from twenty miles per hour to thirty miles per hour. In fact, my recollection is that until about nineteen-ninety, almost the whole world was oblivious to these ideas.”

That was certainly Lick’s impression in 1979. The Multinet/Internet/informationmarketplace notion was encountering much the same kind of apathy that had greeted the Arpanet proposal a decade earlier. The difference was that this time around, ARPA wasn’t in any condition to take the lead and make things happen. As Lick knew from painful experience, the agency that had been created to explore the furthest frontiers now had a “long-term” research horizon of something like two to three years.

Of course, as Lick undoubtedly was also aware, things had improved somewhat since he left. In the game of musical chairs that had followed his departure in September 1975, his deputy, Dave Russell, had moved up to become director of the IPT Office, and networking chief Bob Kahn had moved up in 1976 to become Russell’s deputy. Kahn had then brought Vint Cerf in from Stanford to take his place, and gone to work doing what he could to restore IPTO’s lost glory.

Such were the benefits of credibility, explains Kahn: because he’d learned to talk the language of “defense relevance” very early in the game, and because he was a pretty tough-minded program manager himself, ARPA director George Heilmeier had given him a relatively free hand. “If I really wanted something,” he says, “George might grumble, but he’d usually give it to me.”

What Kahn wanted for starters was to undo the damage. While he could agree with the director on one thing—that parts of ARPA’s computer-research program had indeed gotten self-indulgent; Heilmeier’s “wire brushing” had done the program good, Kahn thought—he had come to agree with Lick even more: ARPA’s current obsession with “relevance” had come dangerously close to destroying what made the agency so special. Remember, says Kahn, when it came to basic computer research—the kind of high-risk, high-payoff work that might not mature for a decade or more—ARPA was almost the only game in town. The computer industry itself was oriented much more toward products and services, he says, which meant that “there was actually very little research going on that was as innovative as ARPA’s.” And while there were certainly some shining exceptions to that rule—notably PARC, IBM, and Bell Labs— “many of the leading scientists and researchers couldn’t be supported that way. So if the universities didn’t do basic research, where would industry get its trained people?”

Yet it was ARPA’s basic research that was getting cut. “The budget for basic R&D was only about one third of what it was before Lick came in,” says Kahn. “Morale in the whole computer-science community was very low. The challenge for me was, how do we rebuild what has been torn down, and put it on a more solid foundation?”

A big piece of Kahn’s solution was a major initiative in cutting-edge microchip technology. Such a research program would be good for the universities, he knew, because they were literally being priced out of the market. Here was a technology that had become fundamental to nearly everything in computing, from major advances in AI to new kinds of massively parallel machine architectures. And yet with semiconductor fabrication plants now costing hundreds of millions of dollars apiece, and with the setup costs of producing a one-of-a-kind chip running to tens of thousands of dollars, only the IBMs and Intels of the world could afford to experiment with these new designs.

At the same time, Kahn knew, an ARPA initiative would be good for the computer companies, which weren’t really looking at the long term. The technology’s potential was obviously breathtaking. According to an ARPA-funded panel convened in 1976 by the RAND Corporation (and headed by none other than Ivan Sutherland), “the integrated circuit revolution [had] only run half its course” by then.’ In the mid-1970s, the state of the art allowed for maybe a thousand transistors on a single chip, a level that would come to be known as medium-scale integration. Within a few years, moreover, the industry would be moving into “large-scale integration,” with tens of thousands of transistors on each chip. But by the mid-1980s, said the panel—only ten years out—companies could reasonably expect to reach the level of “very-large-scale integration,” wherein chips would hold millions of transistors each.

If, that is, the investment was made zow to support such an advance. After all, integration on that scale meant getting down to microstructures less than a micron (i.e., a few millionths of an inch) wide, arrayed in patterns of bewildering complexity. And that meant that the chip manufacturers had to come up not only with new ways to carry out the fabrication process itself, but also with much better ways to design their chips in the first place. Unfortunately, that was precisely what the companies weren’t doing. After an extensive tour of semiconductor firms, Sutherland and his fellow panel members concluded that “U.S. industry generally appears to persist in incremental development.” Indeed, the microchip industry suffered from many of the same problems as private sector networking: proprietary techniques, incompatible protocols (in this case, for variables such as the standard spacing between features), and a lack of incentive to share ideas or technology.

What was needed, in short, was leadership—which Kahn was determined to supply. By 1977 he had talked Heilmeier into approving a VLSI (for “very-largescale integration”) initiative that would encompass submicron chip design, and by 1978 he had begun to award specific grants—a process rendered somewhat easier by the fact that Heilmeier had left ARPA in December 1977 to become research chief at Texas Instruments. (The new director, Bob Fossum, took a much more relaxed approach, says Kahn. “Heilmeier dissected everything; he was a body puncher. Fossum would say, ‘If an idea feels good to you, let’s do it.’ ”) And by 1979, when Lick’s Multinet article appeared, Kahn was preparing to ramp up his VLSI program in a big way.

Well, actually, Kahn bad been preparing to leave ARPA entirely, figuring that seven years there was long enough. But after Dave Russell retired as IPTO director that year, Fossum had insisted that Kahn was the man to take his place. So he’d finally agreed, says Kahn, because “I still had a very long list of things I wanted to see happen, and being director was probably an effective way to make them happen.”

Besides, thanks to one of the first and most productive awards he ever made in the VLSI program—the award that went to Carver Mead of Caltech and Lynn Conway of PARC~—another idea was beginning to crystallize in Kahn’s brain.

Mead and Conway, he explains, had pioneered a way of teaching integrated circuit design via an elegant and very general set of design principles. Draft chapters of their textbook, /ztroduction to VLSI Systems, had been circulating since 1977 and had already been used in courses at Caltech, Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, and MIT. (The book itself; which was published in 1979, would go on to become a bible for VLSI professionals.) But just as important, says Kahn, Mead and Conway had conceived the notion of a “silicon foundry.” The idea was that students in an IC design course would each prepare a chip layout, specified in a standard chip description language, and then send it over the Arpanet to a “silicon broker”—originally PARC and then later Hewlett-Packard. The broker, in turn, would compile dozens of individual designs and then arrange with a chip manufacturer to have them all etched onto a single silicon wafer, so that the cost could be shared. Finally, the chips would be cut apart, packaged individually, and sent back to the students for testing and experimentation. The system worked beautifully; in the fall of 1978, when Conway taught the design course at MIT for the first time, her students sent their designs off in early December and got their chips back just six weeks later.

By the time Kahn stepped up to the IPTO directorship in November 1979, this ad hoc silicon foundry network was being used by 124 designers from eleven universities. Indeed, it would soon become an institution: in January 1981 Kahn would make it a formal program known as the Metal Oxide Silicon Implementation System, or MOSIS. Run by the Information Sciences Institute at the University of Southern California and serving industrial and university researchers as well as students, MOSIS would flourish into the 1990s. And chip innovation would flourish along with it. MOSIS supported design experiments for advanced architectures such as Intel’s Cosmic Cube and the Connection Machine from Thinking Machines, Inc. It supported experiments in reduced-instruction-set computing at Stanford and Berkeley, thereby providing a proof-of-concept for a number of cutting-edge commercial chips of the late 1980s and 1990s. It even supported the development of the “graphics engine” chip by Stanford’s James Clark, who would soon be applying his expertise as a cofounder of Silicon Graphics, Inc. And most of all, says Kahn, “the MOSIS project produced an awful lot of people trained in VLSI design.” Indeed, you could argue that MOSIS was as much responsible as any other single factor for the explosion in microchip technology during the 1980s and 1990s.

Even in 1979, moreover, Kahn could see that a whole community was coming into being around this MOSIS-in-embryo, just as a community had once coalesced around Project MAC-—and indeed, around the Arpanet itself. And something about that fact deeply impressed him. Kahn was struck by the analogy to the way malls, stores, and office buildings will spring up along a new highway, or the way power-intensive industries like paper or steel will take root where power is cheap, as in Washington State or the Tennessee Valley. In his own way, in fact, Kahn was independently coming to much the same conclusion that Lick and Dertouzos had reached: networking had the potential to become not just a technology but an electronic commons, an information infrastructure that would be central to the economy of the twenty-first century.

Better still, Kahn realized, the technical wherewithal for such an information infrastructure was actually in fairly good shape, now that Vint Cerf was at ARPA and pursuing his “single-minded goal” of making the TCP/IP protocol suite as robust and as bulletproof as possible. Indeed, the Defense Department was getting ready to make TCP/IP the standard for all its digital communications, and Cerf was beginning to plan the mammoth task of converting the Arpanet itself to TCP/IP. So there it was: even Lick had to admit that the situation at ARPA had improved significantly since his day. But for how long? Bob Kahn had done great things, granted. And after Heilmeier, a director like Bob Fossum was a joy. But in the current climate of budgetary and “relevance” constraints, who knew what the next director might be like?

Nonetheless, Lick wrote in his “Multinet” article, he was still an optimist. Even if you couldn’t automatically look to the private sector or to the government for leadership, you still had—well, the People. At least when it came to computing, he wrote, “there is a feeling of renewed hope in the air that the public interest will find a way of dominating the decision processes that shape the future.”°

Just look at E-mail, the Arpanet mailing lists, and all the rest, he said. Just look at the on-line communities that seemed to come into being wherever there was a network. Users of a modern computing system weren’t just passive consumers; the medium itself drew them in. It gave them a forum, it made them active participants, it gave them a stake in deciding their own destiny. So if you could somehow expose ordinary people to this medium—if you could somehow get the technology out of the laboratory and into the mass market so they could experience it firsthand—then ordinary people might just create this embodiment of equality, community, and freedom on their own.

It was a vision that was downright Jeffersonian in its idealism, and perhaps in its naiveté as well. Nonetheless, Lick insisted, “the renewed hope I referred to is more than just a feeling in the air... . It is a feeling one experiences at the console. The information revolution is bringing with it a key that may open the door to a new era of involvement and participation. The key is the self-motivating exhilaration that accompanies truly effective interaction with information and knowledge through a good console connected through a good network to a good computer.”° THE SLAUGHTER OF THE WHITECOATS He had a point.

Lick may have revealed a hopelessly unfashionable lack of cynicism in that last paragraph, but his “self-motivating exhilaration” was real enough—and not just in the Tech Square terminal room, either. The phenomenon had been gathering force for the better part of a generation, both in the marketplace and in society at large. Witness the public’s eager embrace of computer utilities in the 1960s, when thousands of nonprofessionals had finally gotten the chance to tap in and experience the exhilaration firsthand. Or witness the rhetoric of counterculture gurus such as Stewart Brand (who'd called computing “the best news since psychedelics”) and Ted Nelson, an independently wealthy computer activist who had declared that “hypertext”—a word he’d invented to describe the electronic links first imagined by Vannevar Bush—would at last allow us to break free from linear thought and hierarchical power structures. The ARPA vision of personal involvement with computers had resonated deeply with the head-tripping, antiestablishment spirit of the era.

Perhaps most of all, however, the power of Lick’s self-motivating exhilaration had been reflected in the success of the Digital Equipment Corporation and its downright subversive efforts to democratize computing with cheap, affordable hardware.

Now, DEC was certainly no stranger to big machines. Its PDP-6 and PDP-10 time-sharing computers had cabinets that filled a room and price tags to match (staffers half jokingly called them personal mainframes). But for those very reasons, they had never gotten much more than a cool endorsement from company founder and CEO, Ken Olsen. He liked equipment that you could get your hands on, that you could tinker with yourself. Moreover, he had reason to believe that DEC’s customers felt the same way. Back in the company’s precomputer days, when it was still establishing itself as a manufacturer of transistorized circuit boards, Olsen and his colleagues had discovered that people were using their products in ways they’d never anticipated. “The laboratory customers bought all these little pieces from us,” says Olsen—“modules, connectors, sockets, cables, piddly little mechanical things—and they’d put them together and they worked!”

In response, DEC had started printing up a product catalog, an inexpensive pulp paperback that included a tutorial on how to connect DEC’s modules to one another and to other laboratory equipment. “When they first saw it,” Ken Olsen’s brother Stan later recalled, “our engineering people rolled over with laughter because they’d never seen anything so different from the real slick stuff. [But] we produced about sixty thousand of them. We would go to the IEEE show in New York City, the event of the year for us, and we’d hand out thousands.”’ Pages from the book could be seen blowing through the subways during the show, but dog-eared copies would also be found in laboratories and offices for years afterward.

DEC was clearly making a connection here from engineer to engineer. And when the company began its move into full-fledged computers with the PDP-1, it did its best to keep on making that connection. The PDP-1 was an “open” hardware system in much the same sense that more than a decade later, the Kahn-Cerf protocols would be open: all the details of the core architecture were publicly spelled out, so that users could add to the machine in any way they wanted. Nowadays, this kind of architecture is familiar to anyone who has ever opened up a personal computer and dropped in a new video card or added more memory. But in the 1960s it represented a relationship with the customer that was unique in the computer industry. IBM and the other mainstream manufacturers kept very tight control of their products in those days: computers were typically leased rather than sold, and the software was totally proprietary. And that was the way most of their customers liked it. Yes, they had to take whatever the vendor gave them, but in return, the vendor was always there to worry about maintenance, repairs, and upgrades—a form of technological hand holding that most people in the business world found very reassuring.

As a start-up, however, DEC couldn’t afford to provide that level of technical support; that was one reason it sold rather than leased its computers. Besides, the company was aiming not for businessmen but for the hands-on engineering crowd, the people who loved to tinker with their machines. As far as those customers were concerned, “interactive” computing had just acquired a whole new meaning.

By 1964, in fact, their response to the PDP-1 and the company’s subsequent products led DEC to start developing a “tabletop” computer intended for small groups of users or even individuals. The PDP-8, as it came to be known, was a significant gamble for the firm: the machine that had inspired it—Wes Clark’s LINC-—was barely out of its development phase itself. No one knew how much of a market there really was for such a machine. As it turned out, however, the timing was auspicious. The watchwords for the PDP-8 project were price (low), size (small), and performance (high); semiconductor and storage technology was ripe for advances in all three areas. For many applications, in fact—the major exception being arithmetic on very large “floating point” numbers, where the machine’s twelve-bit architecture proved to be a severe bottleneck—the PDP-8 would have no problem living up to DEC’s trade literature, which proclaimed it “one of the fastest computers in the world.”®

It would also be one of the cheapest to manufacture. “We set out to study all the technology used for home appliances and automobiles,” says Olsen. “I went to several discount stores for hours, studying every single washing machine, drier, and stove to see how they built things and what we could use. The switch handles [on the circuit boards] came from a Maytag dryer. Using a glass panel without separate lights showing was the technology used in appliances. Inside, we used the slip-on connectors that were commonly used in automobiles. We tried every way we could to take the technology that made mass production possible in appliances.”

The result was a computer so unbelievably small and light—at just 250 pounds-—that it could be transported in the back seat of a Volkswagen Beetle convertible. (For those who didn’t believe that claim, DEC ran an ad providing photographic proof: smiling model in front, PDP-8 in back.) More to the point, it had an unbelievably low price of eighteen thousand dollars, complete with Model 33 Teletype terminal. True, that wasn’t exactly pocket change, especially not in the 1960s. But it was just under one sixth the price of the PDP-1, and far cheaper than anything in the IBM catalog. To customers, most important, it was irresistible. No sooner had the machines started shipping in April 1965 than they started flying out of the Mill, winding up in chemical plants, newspapers, laboratories, refineries, and schools. Much to the astonishment of DEC staffers and everyone else, even nontechnical users loved a computer they could get their hands on. One PDP-8 controlled the digital scoreboards at Boston’s Fen way Park; another ran the streaming news display in New York City’s Times Square. There was even a PDP-8-based time-sharing system: TSS/8, created at Carnegie Mellon University.

Indeed, the PDP-8 and its open architecture soon inspired an entirely new kind of entrepreneur in the computer industry. Known somewhat confusingly as Original Equipment Manufacturers, or OEMs, these firms would buy the raw PDP-8s, add peripherals and other equipment as needed, write a software package, and market the result as a complete typesetting system, say, or a complete scientific instrumentation system. DEC eventually sold at least half of its PDP-8s in this way, without ever having to make an investment in software, end-user training, service, or maintenance. In the process, moreover, the company proved just how powerful the open-systems approach really was. By giving up absolute control, by publicizing the kind of technical details that other computer manufacturers guarded with fanatical jealousy, by letting users take charge of their own machines, DEC could benefit from the creativity and entrepreneurial energy of a far larger community than it ever could have mustered in-house.

Before it was all over, in fact, DEC would sell some fifty thousand PDP-8s in all the model’s versions—not counting the additional thousands it would later implement as one-chip microprocessors. By 1970, moreover, some seventy competitors were offering similar machines, though none could overcome DEC’s head start. The PDP-8 made the company. DEC’s revenues grew by more than 50 percent a year in this period, with its profits growing by a factor of six between fiscal 1965 and 1967 alone. And trade publications finally started taking notice, touting DEC as a rising young contender in an industry still dominated by IBM. True, IBM couldn’t have cared less. Like the big American auto companies, which spent the 1960s being disdainful of the plebian Volkswagen Beetle and cheap Japanese imports such as Toyota and Honda, IBM was dismissive of the low-end niche markets being tapped by the PDP-8. The profit margins there were just too thin—and besides, there was no way to modify the System/360 architecture to accommodate such low-power machines.

But then, the DEC team couldn’t have cared less, either. They saw the PDP-8 as the prototype for a whole new genre of computers. John Leng, head of DEC’s operations in the United Kingdom, was particularly taken with that idea. Zigzagging through London in his Austin Mini Minor automobile, taking in the striking new fashion scene along Carnaby Street, Leng would dictate inimitable sales reports: “Here is the latest minicomputer activity in the land of miniskirts as I drive around in my Mini Minor.”? The name stuck: the PDP-8 was the first minicomputer.

It would hardly be the last. By the early 1970s, thanks to Moore’s law, that first generation of 12-bit machines had given way to a new generation of much more powerful 16-bit minis. The first, in 1969, was Data General’s Nova, the machine that would so impress the hardware mavens at Xerox PARC. But DEC came back in the spring of 1970 with its own PDP-11, which quickly became the machine to beat in the 16-bit market. DEC would eventually sell nearly a million PDP-11s, running the gamut from small four-user systems to big sixty-fouruser models; microprocessor versions would be marketed well into the 1990s. And then in 1977 DEC came out with the VAX, which was actually a whole new line of “Virtual Address eXtension” machines that extended the PDP-11 architecture to 32 bits. The first and largest of the line, the refrigerator-sized VAX11/780, sold for $120,000 in its most basic configuration and was an instant hit. Every other minicomputer maker was left to play catch-up—especially Data General. (That company’s struggle to produce an answer to the VAX would be beautifully chronicled in Tracy Kidder’s 1981 book, The Soul of a New Machine.) By 1977 DEC’s revenues had passed $1 billion per year.

Along the way, meanwhile, all of these increasingly high-powered minicomputers had rolled right over the faltering “computer utility” industry. After all, why should anybody pay upward of ten dollars an hour in connect charges per user—twenty thousand dollars for a year of eight-hour days—when that same money would buy a mini that could support a dozen users? (Most of the utility companies quickly folded; the idea wouldn’t really revive until the 1980s, when modem-equipped microcomputers started tapping into newer, network-based utilities such as CompuServe and America Online.) And out in the labs, by no coincidence, those same new-generation minis were inciting users into open revolt against the tyranny of mainframes—a process that Steve Wolff calls the slaughter of the whitecoats.

Remember, explains Wolff, who was then a networking expert with the army’s Ballistic Research Lab at Aberdeen Proving Ground, unless you were at one of the labs blessed by ARPA, computing was still a matter of typing up those same damn punch cards, trudging down to the computer center, and handing in your deck to those same arrogant SOB technicians in their white coats. Wolff had resented those guys since he was an undergraduate. “You really felt it when you’d been slaving away to write your programs in an un-air-conditioned dorm room, and you could feel the blast of cold air coming out of the window where you handed in your cards,” he says.

Ah, but then the minicomputers came along, the high-tech embodiments of individual autonomy, hands-on control, and freedom. Naturally, says Wolff, the computer centers tried to have them outlawed. “But there were many groups that stormed the bastions and slaughtered the whitecoats. They discovered that they could buy a computer cheaply—a PDP-8, a PDP-11, or, later, a VAX—and run it themselves. It wasn’t as fast as a mainframe. But they could turn it on and let it run all weekend.” Sure, he says, you still needed mainframes for big-time number-crunching; IBM wasn’t going broke, and neither was Seymour Cray, with his “supercomputers.” But for your small- to mid-size groups, such as university departments, research labs, and even many businesses, the in-house mini rapidly became the computer of choice in the 1970s.

It was glorious fun, Wolff remembers. Then, around 1974, Unix came along, and suddenly you could get your hands on the software, too. “Unix was the first really general-purpose operating system for minicomputers,” he says. “It took off for two reasons. One, it was free. And two, Unix was the first operating system you could get source code [the full list of programming commands] for. You could hack it.”

Actually, Unix was “free” only because AT&T wasn’t allowed to sell it; until the breakup, in 1982, the company was a regulated telephone monopoly and as such was barred from doing much of anything in the computer business. But Unix was hackable because it was about as open as a system could get. Order the data tapes (nominal charge: $150 for materials), and you got the complete source code, which was yours to modify as you wished. Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson had created Unix for their own use back in 1969, after Bell Labs’ withdrawal from the Multics partnership, and the project had retained that loose, hands-on feeling ever since.

Then, too, Ritchie and Thompson had created Unix with hacking in mind, deriving its basic structure from Fernando Corbaté’s CTSS via Multics—namely, a tool kit of utilities and software routines that the user could call upon to perform specific tasks, all built on top of an invisible “kernel” of software that functioned as the autonomic nervous system of the computer, seamlessly moving bits through the machine at a level below the user’s consciousness. The difference was that the Unix kernel was a marvel of efficiency, simplicity, and conciseness. This was partly a reaction against the complexities of Multics (the designers kept the features that seemed truly useful, such as the file structure, and left out the more baroque elaborations) and partly a reflection of Ritchie and Thompson’s ancient and underpowered PDP-7, the only machine they could scrounge for the project. But mainly Unix was tightly written because that was how the two men felt a kernel ought to be: sweet, quick, and clean. When Ritchie and Thompson were finally able to migrate their system to a PDP-11 in 1970, they weren’t even tempted to add extra bells and whistles.

They followed the same aesthetic with the software tool kit. Each routine— “copy,” for example (abbreviated cp), or “print” (pr)—was designed to do one specific thing as efficiently as possible. But the routines were also designed to be connected together like so much plumbing-literally. By February 1973, when they made their first public presentation of their system, Ritchie, Thompson, and the other members of their steadily growing Unix group had data flowing from one component to the next through software constructs known as pipes. The result was a Unix environment in which it was very easy to connect simple routines on the fly to form more complex utilities.

At the time of that initial presentation, there were just sixteen Unix installations in the world, all inside AT&T. Within six months, as word spread outside the company, that number had tripled.

Of course, sometimes you had to get down into the bits and bytes and compose a completely new software tool. But that was pretty easy, too, especially after Ritchie completely rewrote the Unix kernel in an elegant new computer language of his own devising. Since he’d based it on an earlier, experimental language by Thompson, code-named “B,” Ritchie code-named his language “C.” The name stuck. By July 1974, when the written version of their presentation came out in the journal Communications of the ACM, the team had rewritten key elements of the software tool kit in C, and Unix had taken a long stride toward the nirvana of “machine independence.” In principle, all you had to do was take the free Unix source code, run it through a C compiler for your specific brand of machine, and you’d have a Unix operating system that worked just as well on your machine as it did on the PDP-11.

Once the article had been published, orders for the data tapes started pouring in. Hundreds and then thousands of minicomputer users junked their manufacturer-supplied operating systems, which tended to be pretty lame anyway, and started compiling Unix to run on their own machines. In practice, of course, this wasn’t quite as easy as it sounded on paper. But for the techies of the world, of whom there were many, that just added to the appeal. They happily wrote their own “drivers”—that is, the routines that told Unix how to communicate with the specific brand of display terminal they were using, or the specific printer, or the specific kind of network connection—and then passed those drivers around to other users. They wrote new editors, new debuggers, new software tools of all kinds, and passed those around. And they devised little improvements in the kernel and passed those around, along with software patches for bugs they’d uncovered and fixed on their own initiative.

Indeed, the users quickly turned Unix into the People’s Operating System, “open software” that would flourish through the 1970s in much the same way that its descendant, Linux, would do in the late 1990s. Moreover, at Ken Thompson’s alma mater, Berkeley, where he spent a sabbatical year in 1975 spreading the gospel, a quietly brilliant graduate student named Bill Joy was soon leading a covey of like-minded Unix mavens on a quest to make Unix more usable by and more accessible to ontechies. By decade’s end, their Berkeley System Distribution 4.2 Unix was emerging as a semiofficial standard in the community, complete with an endorsement from ARPA itself. And Joy and his crew had been commissioned by that same agency to integrate TCP/IP into Unix.

To help with all this sharing of information, meanwhile, another group of Unix mavens were putting together a “poor man’s Arpanet,” a.k.a. Usenet.

That innovation began in the fall of 1979, when graduate students Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis, along with a number of their friends at Duke and at the nearby University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, were looking for a way to communicate with their fellow Unix enthusiasts on-line (Truscott had just returned from a marvelous summer at Unix heaven, Bell Labs). Neither school was on the Arpanet, unfortunately, but Truscott, Ellis, and their friends realized that they could just cobble together a little bulletin-board utility based on the Unix version of E-mail. True, communications would have to run over 300-bit-persecond modems, but still, the system worked. After several revisions and a complete rewrite in C, moreover, not to mention some help from sympathizers at both Bell Labs and DEC, it worked quite well. In January 1980 the Duke-UNC cabal presented its “rapid-access newsletter” at a national meeting of Usenix, the Unix users’ group. At first, Truscott noted in the written announcement, most messages would probably be concerned with “bug fixes, trouble reports, and general cries for help,”!° but the system could also support other newsgroups if there was enough interest.

There was. Slowly at first, then more and more rapidly, Usenet became living proof of a prediction that Lick and Bob Taylor had made back in 1968, in their article on the computer as a communications device: “Life will be happier for the on-line individual because the people with whom one interacts most strongly will be selected more by commonality of interests and goals than by accidents of proximity.”!! Newsgroups proliferated. There was net.unix-wizards, for example, and net.chess, and fa.human-nets—the last devoted to the implications of worldwide networking. (The prefix fa stood for “from Arpanet.” The naming scheme with the dots was invented by Duke graduate student Stephen Daniel; it has since been refined into now-familiar categories such as comp for computers, rec for hobbies, and alt for anything goes.) By 1981 the ad hoc Usenet encompassed something like 150 sites around the country. And among them, significantly, was Berkeley, where Usenet had gained its first portal to the Arpanet. This, in turn, opened it to the already flourishing world of Arpanet mailing lists, such as the legendary “SF-Lovers” list for science-fiction buffs. By the mid-1980s articles were flowing both ways, newsgroups were proliferating madly—today they number in the tens of thousands—and Usenet was well on its way to becoming Network News, an integral part of the Internet. THE LOGICAL NEXT STEP That would all come later, of course. Nonetheless, Lick’s “self-motivating exhilaration” had clearly become a very potent force by the mid-1970s. And to modern eyes, at least, the next step in its evolution was blazingly obvious: just take a small minicomputer serving a handful of people and—in effect—shrink it down to a machine serving one person. Indeed, that was exactly what PARC had already done to create the Alto. But alas, Xerox was too busy being Xerox to know what it had. And elsewhere—well, just because a step seems “logical” in hindsight doesn’t mean it automatically gets taken.

At DEC, most notably, there were at least half a dozen proposals for a personal-computer product line during the 1970s, including several that were actually built and marketed to specific customers. (Indeed, building them was almost trivial: it was just a matter of adding some chips to one of DEC’s high-end display terminals, which were already the market leaders.) Yet CEO Ken Olsen seemed unable to shake the idea that “personal computers” and “home computers” were one and the same thing: toys. Gadgets that you hooked up to the TV and used for video games. Well, DEC didn’t make toys. Besides, Olsen famously asked on a number of occasions in the 1970s, “Why would anyone want a computer on his desktop?”

In fairness, the context of those comments shows that what Olsen really meant was, “Why would anyone want a feeble little thing like that on his desktop when he could put a time-sharing terminal there instead, tap into a PDP-10 or whatever, and get some real processing power?” Moreover, at a time when the available microcomputers really were pretty toylike, he had a point. Nonetheless, Olsen’s attitude explains why DEC didn’t take the lead in personal computers, even though it had in place a corporate philosophy and a corporate culture that might have allowed it to do so easily.

Alternatively, there was another route to personal computing that to modern eyes seems just as obvious: simply combine one of the new one-chip microprocessors with the ubiquitous pocket calculator, thus creating a “microcomputer.” And indeed, Hewlett-Packard had already established quite a bit of momentum in that direction, starting with the introduction of its $400 HP-35 in early 1972. Customers loved the device. Simple four-function, arithmetic calculators were one thing; the $250 Bowmar Brain had been a big seller just the previous Christmas. But the HP-35 offered logarithms, exponentials, trigonometric functions—anything a scientist or an engineer might need. Every techie in the world wanted one; countless trusty slide rules were already doomed to obsolescence. In January 1974, moreover, Hewlett-Packard had followed up that success with the first fully programmable pocket calculator, the $795 HP-65, which could store short sequences of keystrokes and play them back (indeed, the HP65 was explicitly introduced as a “personal computer”). By the middle of the decade, competitors were pouring into the field, prices were dropping precip1tously, and the pocket-calculator market was booming.

Certainly those devices set the stage for personal computers, the computer historian Paul Ceruzzi has noted: “Pocket calculators, especially those that were programmable, unleashed the force of personal creativity and energy of masses of individuals.” Within a year, the HP-65 alone had sold more than twenty-five thousand units, “each one owned by an individual who could do whatever he or she wished to do with it.... Nearly all were adult professional men, including civil and electrical engineers, lawyers, financial people, pilots, and so on{, whose] passion for programming made them the intellectual cousins of the students in the Tech Model Railroad Club. And their numbers—only to increase as the price of calculators dropped—were the first indication that personal computing was truly a mass phenomenon.”””

And yet the reality was that the major players out in Silicon Valley weren’t even thinking about microcomputers. In April 1974, for example, Intel introduced its 8-bit 8080 chip, the first microprocessor to come within shouting distance of, say, a 12-bit mini such as the PDP-8. Intel could very easily have gone on to use it in a full-fledged microcomputer, if anyone there had made the connection. But the company was full of hardware guys who were used to selling to other hardware guys, not to end users. “Intel’s mental model of its product,” according to Ceruzzi, “was this: an industrial customer bought an 8080 and wrote specialized software for it, which was then burned into a read-only memory to give a system with the desired functions. The resulting inexpensive product (no longer programmable) was then put on the market as an embedded controller in an industrial system.”!? (Ceruzzi adds that Intel dd build several microcomputers during this period; however, it marketed the ten-thousand-dollar Intellec “Development Systems” not as general-purpose computers but as tools to help customers write and debug software for embedded processors.)

And so it was that the field was left open for the hobbyists in their basements and garages, individuals who didn’t have to worry about meeting payrolls and pleasing the stockholders but just liked to play around with electronics—and were used to making components do things their manufacturers had never imagined. These were the same kinds of tinkerers who’d gotten creative with DEC’s first transistor modules in the 1950s, who’d fallen in love with the PDP-8 in the 1960s, and who were snapping up the programmable calculators now. They were the spiritual brothers of the MIT hackers and the freewheeling Unix mavens. They were the people who had been ham-radio operators and/or stereo buffs since they were teenagers, often using equipment they had built themselves from mail-order kits, or from scratch. They were the guys who had gotten intrigued by the minicomputers they’d encountered at work or at school. And for no “logical” reason whatsoever—certainly none that they could explain to their spouses—they were the people who wanted computers of their own at home, to play with, to experiment with, to experience.

Enter the Altair.

Now, the Altair was zot the first commercial microcomputer; that honor goes to the Micral, an Intel 8008-based machine that was sold in France starting in May 1973. Created by Vietnamese immigrant Thi T. Truong, the two-thousanddollar Micral sold fairly well for a time but was marketed only on the Intel model, as an industrial process controller.

The Altair wasn’t even the first microcomputer kit to appear on the cover of a general-interest electronics magazine. That honor goes to the Mark-8, another 8008-based machine, designed in the fall of 1973 by Jonathan Titus, then a graduate student in chemistry at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute in Blacks burg, Virginia. Hard-core hobbyist that he was, Titus never even thought of starting a company; he just wanted to share his creation with his fellow fanatics. So he wrote to the hobbyist magazine Radio-Electronics, which always tried to offer its readers at least one construction project every month. The result was that magazine’s cover story for July 1974: “Build the Mark-8: Your Personal Minicomputer.”

However, the Altair was the first commercially successful microcomputer. By no coincidence, it was also the first to be based on the Intel 8080, which really was a major advance over the 8008. The father of the Altair was H. Edward Roberts of Albuquerque, New Mexico, a thirty-four-year-old electrical engineer who was a big man not only physically—he stood six foot four and weighed 250 pounds—but in his intellectual appetites as well. He once described himself as the kind of guy who devoured whole library shelves at a time. Mostly, however, Roberts was fascinated by electronics. In 1969, while he was still an air force captain working at nearby Kirkland Air Force Base, he and several of his colleagues founded a hobbyist shop called Micro Instrumentation Telemetry Systems, or MITS, which mainly sold radio transmitters for model airplanes through the mail. Then, in the early 1970s, after leaving the air force and buying out his partners, Roberts branched out into mail-order electronic-calculator kits. These sold pretty briskly until the rapidly falling prices of commercial models made them pointless. So in early 1974, with some twenty-five employees now on his payroll and a company that was suddenly facing bankruptcy, Roberts elected to try a computer kit. He’d always been interested in digital electronics, he later explained, and he’d been wanting to try his hand at building a minicomputer anyway. He proceeded to rough out a design using the Intel 8080, which he’d decided was by far the best chip available. And by midyear he was ready to approach the editors of Popular Electronics, where he’d been an occasional contributor, to ask if they’d like to feature his kit as a construction project.

They would. The magazine was Radio-Electronics’s arch rival, and technical editor Les Solomon just loved the idea of an 8080-based computer project that would top the Mark-8 story. The only ground rules were that the end result had to be a real computer, not a toy like the Mark-8, and the kit had to cost less than four hundred dollars.

The price was feasible; Roberts had already talked Intel into selling him the 8080 chips for just seventy-five dollars apiece in bulk. So he and his codesigners at MITS went into overdrive to get the Altair ready in time. Solomon, meanwhile, came up with the perfect name for the machine. (Looking for ideas, he asked his daughter, Lauren, what they called the computer on Star Trek. “Computer,” she replied. But she added that the starship Exterprise was headed for the star Altair that night, so why not call it that?)

The now-famous January 1975 issue of Popular Electronics hit the newsstands in early December-ironically, just a month before George Heilmeier arrived at ARPA to make J. C. R. Licklider’s life miserable. Since the only real, working Altair had gotten lost in transit before reaching the photographers in New York (it would turn up a year later), the cover showed the best mockup that MITS could manage on short notice: a pale-blue Altair shell with an impressive array of switches and diodes across the front that did absolutely nothing. But it certainly looked like the real thing. And right there in the box’s upper-left-hand corner was the name: Altair 8800. “Project Breakthrough!” proclaimed the headline. “World’s First Minicomputer Kit to Rival Commercial Models.” Inside, readers learned that the kits could be had from MITS for just $397.

MITS would be a year or more digging out from under the avalanche. Having expected maybe a few hundred orders, Roberts and his crew ultimately received more than ten thousand. And why not? The kit was a steal, considering that the retail price of the 8080 chip alone was $360. Besides, that $397 really bought something. If the Altair was one step up from a programmable calculator, it was also just one step down from a minicomputer—a message that Roberts and his codesigner William Yates hammered home again and again in their Popular Electronics article. The Altair, they insisted, was “a full-blown computer that can hold its own against sophisticated minicomputers.”

Indeed, except for the 8080 chip, the Altair was a minicomputer, right down to those switches and diodes on its front face; Roberts had copied the layout from a Data General Nova 2 he’d bought for the MITS office (the company was selling time-sharing services with it). The minicomputer heritage was equally obvious on the inside, where the design was identical in spirit to the “Unibus” architecture of DEC’s PDP-11. Basically, it was yust one big array of slots for add-on cards: everything in the Altair was modular and replaceable.

Even Roberts’s later choice for an official programming language was reminiscent of the minis. Created in the spring of 1975 by two young men who had been inspired by the Popular Electronics article—Bill Gates, now a Harvard undergrad, and his high school buddy Paul Allen, a programmer working outside Boston—Altair BASIC took a number of key features from DEC’s BASIC for the PDP-11. (The language also owed its existence to the Harvard PDP-10, interestingly enough. Since Gates and Allen didn’t have access to an Intel 8080 at the time, they used Gates’s student account on the big machine to create a simulation of the microprocessor—in the process burning up some forty thousand dollars’ worth of computer time that was zot supposed to be used for commercial purposes. But no matter: once the language was ready, Allen quit his job, Gates dropped out of school, they both moved to Albuquerque to be near MITS, and together they formed a little company called Micro Soft to market it.)

Of course, the Altair did have its share of design quirks and reliability problems, not to mention being about as bare-bones as a computer could get. The only way to enter a program was by flipping tiny switches on the front panel (which tended to tear up your fingers), and the only way to get the output was by deciphering the lit-up diodes. The kit included no keyboard, no monitor, no disk drives, no software—nothing but the box itself, which contained little more than a central processing unit, 256 bytes of memory, and all those empty slots for add-on cards. Paradoxically, however, that very spartan simplicity proved to be another big reason for the Altair’s success. The Altair was an open system: Roberts, like DEC before him, had decided to make the specifications for the data bus freely available so anyone could build an add-on card to fit in. And when his own add-on cards for monitors, memory, keyboards, and the like were delayed by the struggle to fill all those back orders for the kit, hundreds of hobbyists and young computer professionals rushed in to do just that. The result was an explosion of entrepreneurial energy, as tiny garage-scale start-ups sprang into being by the hundreds. Roberts’s decision to open up his machine had given the ever-expanding Altair community a direct personal stake in the Altair architecture, just as had happened with the PDP-8 a decade earlier.

Unfortunately for Roberts, however, that wasn’t quite the same thing as giving that community a direct personal stake in the Altair itself. Among the startups were any number of garage shops building microcomputers of their own, including several—with names like IMSAI, SOL, Morrow, Godbout/Compupro, Dynabyte, Cromemco, and Vector Graphic—that were producing outright clones. Since MITS was still laboring to fill those back orders, its rivals found a ready market. (Another open-architecture machine, the IBM PC, would later experience a similar fate.)

Naturally, Roberts fought back. And indeed, once he caught up with the back orders, his company did rather well. By 1976 MITS was offering its own line of expansion boards and peripherals, as well as an upgraded Altair 8800b. Roberts can remember selling equipment to the Secret Service, the FBI, and the CIA, as well as to a fellow working on the special effects for a new science-fiction movie—something called Star Wars. But by that point he was also getting tired of the “soap opera,” his term for the endless round of product upgrades, frustrated customers, panicked dealers, personnel hassles (MITS now had hundreds of employees), and internal politics. He hadn’t had a decent night’s sleep in more than a year. So in mid-1976 he announced that he was selling out to a hard-disk manufacturer, Pertec. By year’s end he was headed off to medical school; he now works as a doctor in Cochran, Georgia. And Pertec, alas, proceeded to run his company into the ground: both MITS and the Altair had vanished by 1979.

If Roberts and his computer were gone, however, the movement they had done so much to create was already self-sustaining. Not only were new brands of machines flooding the market by the dozens, if not by the hundreds, there were also users’ groups for every microcomputer imaginable, as well as pan-micro groups such as the legendary Homebrew Computer Club, which held its first meeting in a Palo Alto garage in March 1975. There were magazines such as Byte, which debuted in August 1975, and the software periodical Dr. Dobbs Journal of Computer Calisthenics and Orthodontia (motto: “Running Light without Over byte”), which published its first issue in 1976. There were specialty stores like the Byte Shop and ComputerLand, the latter soon to be a nationwide chain.

And increasingly there were young entrepreneurs who were beginning to imagine that consumers might want to use these machines—people who weren’t hobbyists, who weren’t technically sophisticated, and who had no desire to pick up a soldering iron. Maybe, just maybe, these micros might appeal to the mass market.

At this late date it’s impossible to say exactly where this notion came from, though a big part of it was undoubtedly the MIT vision of information utilities, plus the resulting computer-utilities boom. Among the computer cognoscenti, at least, the 1960s had been rife with speculations about “home information systems” linked to data centers via telephone lines or antennas. Other possible influences included the hobbyists’ personal experience with minicomputers and pocket calculators, as well as the rumors they’d heard about the wonders at PARC, and the presence of all those thousands of students who had graduated from top computer schools such as MIT, Stanford, Carnegie Mellon, and Berkeley—which also happened to be the top ARPA sites.

But wherever the notion came from, it was obviously in the air by January 1975. As Popular Electronics put it in the editorial that introduced the Altair, “we’ve been reading and hearing about how computers will one day be a household item... for many years.” By 1976, moreover, some of the start-up companies were visibly taking this prospect seriously. A different kind of customer meant a different kind of product, they realized. Instead of just providing a kit, a bag of parts, they would have to offer something much more like an appliance: a finished system that would work as soon as you plugged it in. Keyboard, monitor, disk drives, operating system, software—everything had to be right there in the box, or else be very easy to add.

On the hardware side, this challenge was taken up most famously by the Apple Computer Company, founded in 1976 by Homebrew Computer Club members Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs, longtime buddies from the Silicon Valley town of Cupertino. After some encouraging success with their first computer, which they marketed through local hobby shops—it was actually just a single circuit board using the new, 8-bit 6502 microprocessor from MOS Technology, plus 4 kilobytes of RAM—Jobs and Wozniak were joined by the thirtyfour-year-old A.C. Markkula, formerly the marketing manager for Intel. Markkula, who had retired from that company two years earlier after earning more than a million dollars in stock options, bought a one-third partnership in Apple for $91,000 and began working his contacts to bring in venture capital and management expertise. The result was the Apple II, a much-upgraded, 6502based micro that was introduced in April 1977 at the first West Coast Computer Faire in San Francisco. Apple’s new machine was a beautiful thing to behold, with a built-in keyboard and a professionally designed beige-colored case. It was comparatively cheap, in that a configuration with 16 kilobytes of RAM and no monitor cost just $1,195. It was easily expandable, with plenty of empty slots for add-on cards. It was the focus of an imaginative ad campaign masterminded by the Palo Alto firm of Regis McKenna (an early ad called it “The home computer that’s ready to work, play, and grow with you”). And perhaps most important of all, it was great for playing video games; Wozniak, the technical wizard of the team and a video-game addict himself, had designed it with precisely that use in mind.

Of course, the Apple II had plenty of competition in the consumer market, notably from the Commodore PET, which debuted at the same West Coast Computer Faire, and from the Tandy-Radio Shack TRS-80, which was introduced the following August. In the beginning, moreover, the promises made in the Regis McKenna ad copy—“You’ll be able to organize, index and store data on household finances, income taxes, recipes, your biorhythms, balance your checking account, even control your home environment”—were little more than fantasy; the applications software that would work such magic didn’t exist yet. Nonetheless, the Apple II was an instant hit. By decade’s end Apple itself had become one of the fastest-growing companies in American history. By the time it went public, at the end of 1980—just six years after that Popular Electronics cover story on the Altair—the company had sold more than 130,000 Apple Is and proved to have a market value of $1.2 billion.

On the software side, meanwhile, one of the seminal events had come in April 1976, when Dr. Dobbs Journal informed its readers that they could now equip their micros with a real, grown-up operating system for just seventy-five dollars. Known as CP/M-—for Control Program for Microcomputers—it had been created by thirty-three-year-old Gary Kildall, a computer-science teacher at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California. It was quite similar to DECSYSTEM 10, DEC’s original software for the PDP-10—indeed, Kildall had carried over many DECSYSTEM features without change, including the use of letters to specify particular disk drives, the use of file names containing a period and a three-letter extension, and the use of commands such as “DIR” to get the contents of a directory. But much more important for the hobbyists was that CP/M could handle drives for “floppy” disks, an IBM invention of the early 1970s that was now emerging as a relatively inexpensive mass-storage medium for the microcomputer world.

Sales were predictably brisk. Within a few months Kildall had resigned from his teaching job and, together with his wife, founded a company called Digital Research to market CP/M. And by the following year, 1977, with more than a hundred companies wanting to license CP/M for their new machines, Kildall was hurriedly rewriting the system in a way that he hoped would keep him sane. His basic idea was to collect all the code that had to be customized for each new computer or disk drive and put it into a small Unix-like kernel that he called the Basic Input/Output System, or BIOS. Getting that right for a given machine would then be the responsibility of the licensee, not Kildall. And once that was done, the rest of CP/M would run without change.

Now, if this all sounds familiar, no wonder: when Bill Gates and his crew at Microsoft were later asked to write a “Disk Operating System” for the new IBM PC, they responded with a clone-MS-DOS-—that was just barely different enough from CP/M to avoid legal action. With IBM’s imprimatur, moreover, MS-DOS would soon dominate the market, leaving CP/M to play a long and ultimately futile game of catch-up. In 1977, however, the crucial thing was that Kildall had established a clean separation between a microcomputer’s hardware and software. In effect, he was proposing a new open-interface standard that would allow hardware and software to evolve independently. In the process, moreover, he had cleared the way for CP/M to become a more or less standard operating system for the non-Apple micros, of which there were many. (Ironically, one of Microsoft’s best-selling products in this era was an add-on card that would allow CP/M to run on the Apple II as well.)

The result was the first full flowering of applications software, the shrink-wrapped packages that would become so familiar in the 1980s. By the time Lick’s “Multinet” article came out, in 1979, the software industry had already taken on a recognizably modern form. Games were still the most popular choice, of course, but educational software had a large market, too. And business users were beginning to find office-oriented products such as the WordStar word-processing package, the dBase database program, and the first of the must have killer apps, VisiCalc, an electronic-spreadsheet program for the Apple II that automated the tedious chores of bookkeeping and financial analysis. Businesspeople were soon buying Apple IIs just so they could run the program; Apple later estimated that VisiCalc was responsible for the sale of some twenty-five thousand units in the package’s first year alone.

Meanwhile, Big Blue itself was gearing up to enter the fray. Its IBM Personal Computer, based on Intel’s new 8088 chip, would be among the first of the next-generation 16-bit micros. When it debuted in August 1981, moreover, the IBM PC immediately legitimized the microcomputer as a really serious business machine: retailers couldn’t keep it on their shelves. Within weeks IBM was obliged to quadruple its planned production run. Within a year the IBM PC architecture had become a de facto industry standard, microcomputer sales as a whole were going exponential, and so were the fortunes of little Microsoft: Gates had not only provided IBM with its DOS operating system for the PC, but had cannily retained the rights for his company to sell that same operating system to other manufacturers.

By the end of 1982, microcomputers had become such a phenomenon that even the editors of Time took notice. On January 3, 1983, having passed over such milestones as the Falklands War, Israel’s invasion of Lebanon, the death of Leonid Brezhnev, and the release of E.77, they announced that Time’s Man of the Year for 1982—“the greatest influence for good or evil”—was not a human being at all but a machine: the computer. “In 1982,” declared the magazine’s cover story, “a cascade of computers beeped and blipped their way into the American office, the American school, the American home. The ‘information revolution’ that futurists have long predicted has arrived, bringing with it the promise of dramatic changes in the way people live and work, perhaps even in the way they think. America will never be the same.”

Indeed she would not. Nor, for that matter, would the thousands of techno geeks who suddenly and miraculously found themselves becoming rich young entrepreneurs. In the fall of 1979, to take just one example, motivated largely by a desire to stay together after they began to graduate, eight current and former students in the MIT Dynamic Modeling group had formed a company called Infocom. Lick and Al Vezza had joined as well, serving as advisers and investors while staying at MIT. Infocom’s first product was a microcomputer version of Zork, an adventure-style role-playing game that the students had earlier created for fun on the group’s PDP-10. It drew rave reviews—“Entertaining, eloquent, witty, and precisely written,” said Byfe—and was soon followed by Zork II, Zork ITT, Starcross (a science-fiction adventure that was packaged in its own flying saucer), Deadline, and a slew of other titles. By 1983 Infocom was racking up some $6 million in annual sales and had become a major player in the fast growing gaming market. The firm had an elegant suite of offices at 55 Wheeler Street in Cambridge. And the former Dynamic Modelers had started work on their first “serious” software product, Cornerstone, a sophisticated database system that (they hoped) would boost them into the same orbit occupied by their Cambridge neighbor Lotus Development Corporation, creator of the megahit spreadsheet Lotus 1-2-3.*

Even Lick was pleased by Infocom’s success, says Tracy Licklider, who himself worked at VisiCorp (the maker of VisiCalc) during this period and later served as president of the Boston Computer Society. It wasn’t that his father ever cared about money per se, he says, but Lick was certainly happy for his former students’ sake. And he was enthralled by the sight of his “self-motivating exhilaration” going mass-market at a speed and on a scale that he had never thought possible. Millions of people had grown up thinking of computers as big machines, mysterious machines, omniscient, cold, and relentless machines. But * Unfortunately, Cornerstone would prove to be the beginning of the end for Infocom. The development process would be extravagantly expensive, not to mention a tremendous distraction from the firm’s more lucrative gaming market. In February 1986 the financially troubled company would be acquired by a firm named Activision, which would proceed to run it into the ground. Infocom now exists only as a memory. now those same people could walk into their local ComputerLand and see all these /ttle machines. It was as if the computer had been reinvented before their eyes: the pitiless HAL 9000 of 2001: A Space Odyssey had become the Computer for the Rest of Us, an instrument of individual empowerment. Indeed, the new micros were not only friendly but downright intimate. They were “mirrors of the mind,” as the MIT sociologist Sherry Turkle put it in her 1984 book, The Second Self “In talking to personal computer owners,” she explained, “I found that for them the computer is important not just for what it does but for how it makes you feel. It is described as a machine that lets you see yourself differently, as in control, as ‘smart enough to do science,’ as more fully participant in the future.”!*

Lick couldn’t have said it better himself. In fact, he seems to have found only one thing to complain about in the personal-computer revolution: the machines themselves. “He got an IBM PC,” remembers Tracy Licklider, “but it never had the resources to do what he wanted.” Yes, Lick knew, these talented little micros had been good enough to reinvent the computer in the public mind, which was no small thing. But so far, at least, they had shown people only the faintest hint of what was possible. Before his vision of a free and open information commons could be a reality, the computer would have to be reinvented several more times yet, becoming not just an instrument for individual empowerment but a communications device, an expressive medium, and, ultimately, a window into online cyberspace.

In short, the mass market would have to give the public something much closer to the system that had been created a decade before at Xerox PARC. LOVING NOT WISELY, BUT TOO WELL Certainly that was how the wizards out on Coyote Hill Road saw the situation— and why they found it so galling to watch the mass media gushing over the likes of Bill Gates and Steve Jobs.

“It had never occurred to us that people would buy crap,” declares Alan Kay, who considered the hobbyists in their garages down the hill to be very bright and very creative ignoramuses—undisciplined kids who didn’t read and didn’t have a clue about what had already been done. They were successful only because their customers were just as unsophisticated. “What none of us was thinking was that there would be millions of people out there who would be perfectly happy with the McDonald’s hamburger approach: they didn’t know it wasn’t real food.”

The PARC-ites had known about the micros from the beginning, of course. They read the hobbyist magazines, too. They shopped at Radio Shack. And at least a few of them attended the twice-weekly meetings of the Homebrew Computer Club, held just a mile or so away, in an auditorium at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center. Yet like Lick and most of the rest of the ARPA community, they found it hard to see the micros as anything more than toys. Imagine what it was like to go from the Alto’s WYSIWYG text editing to an Apple II, says Jerry Elkind: “You had to hook it up to a television, and you got only forty characters per line, with no lowercase letters. It was terrible.” “It was a different level of aspiration,” agrees Chuck Thacker. “I did buy an Apple II and look at it early on. It turned out to be based on a 6502 microprocessor, which was the same chip we used as a controller in the Alto keyboard!”

PARC, they were confident, had something much more exciting to offer—zf they could ever get that something out the door.

This was actually getting to be a matter of some urgency. In 1974 PARC’s technology had been light-years beyond anything else in the world, but by the late 1970s that lead was dwindling fast. PARC hadn’t exactly kept itself a secret, after all. The wizards had published papers, given seminars, recruited students, and proselytized at every opportunity. The lab had likewise kept its door open: just about everybody in the computer field had already visited the place, or knew somebody who was working there, or was angling for a way to work there himself. So PARC’s ideas were known by the late 1970s.

As early as 1974, for example, MIT’s AI Lab had started experimenting with personal machines that were specialized for running Lisp, but with graphics inspired by the bit-mapped display on the Alto. By 1977, hand-built models were in routine use at Tech Square. And by 1980, commercial versions were being produced under license by two new Cambridge-area start-ups: Symbolics and Lisp Machine, Inc. At Carnegie Mellon, likewise, a group that included longtime PARC consultant Allen Newell, PARC veteran Bob Sproull, and MIT AI Lab veteran Scott Fahlman had convinced the computer-science department to embrace a version of personal distributed computing that they called the Scientific Personal Integrated Computing Environment, or SPICE. “The era of time-sharing is ended,” they declared in the department’s 1979 invitation for vendors to bid on the SPICE computer. “New possibilities [include] high resolution color graphics, 1 million instructions per second, ... 1 megabyte primary memory, 100 megabyte secondary memory [hard disk]... . We would expect that by the mid-1980s such systems could be priced around $10,000.” They were right. And while the department’s eventual choice in the competition would be a disappointment—the new PERQ computer from start-up Three Rivers, Inc., conceived as a next-generation derivative of the Alto, proved to contain a number of dead-end design features—the Carnegie Mellon effort was nonetheless a wake up call to the community as a whole: high-end, graphics-based machines of the Alto class and above, a group that people were beginning to call workstations, might actually find a market.* * In the spring of 1982, to take just one example, in the Silicon Valley town of Mountain View, California, a workstation company was founded by four twenty-seven-year-olds. Stanford University grad student Andreas Bechtolsheim contributed the initial product, an elegant but

Meanwhile, PARC’s Ethernet was also moving out into the world—carried by Bob Metcalfe himself.

He had been one of the first of the major players to resign from PARC, Metcalfe explains. A certain restlessness had set in. So in 1975, with Ethernet pretty well completed and, sadly, a divorce in its final stages, he had abruptly taken a job with a subsidiary of Citibank in Los Angeles. Then, just seven months later, having accomplished what he was hired for, which was to modernize Citibank’s electronic funds-transfer system, and having conceived a loathing for the bank’s march-in-step corporate culture, he headed north again. By mid-1976 he was back in Palo Alto, working at Xerox’s Systems Development Division. “[But] in the middle of nineteen seventy-eight I decided that I wanted to start my own company,” he says, “because that’s what you did in Silicon Valley. I didn’t even know what I wanted to do. So I just left, and for five months I became a consultant. Then I got the call from Gordon Bell,” the chief engineer for the Digital Equipment Corporation.

Bell, it developed, had persuaded DEC’s leadership to adopt a long-term “VAX strategy,” which called for that machine to replace all the company’s earlier, incompatible product lines. There would be mainframe-size VAXes for enterprise-wide functions such as corporate accounting and E-mail distribution; minicomputer-size VAXes for group- or department-level functions such as typesetting and computer-aided design; and desktop-size VAXes for personal computing needs such as word processing. Moreover, every one of these VAXes would run the same operating system and application software, just as IBM had promised more than a decade earlier with its System/360 computers. However, Bell emphasized, in this case there would be one critical difference. Whereas the System/360 mainframes had operated as stand-alone machines, he wanted the VAXes to be connected the way the Altos were at PARC, so they could function as nodes in an integrated, enterprise-wide work environment.

Thus his call to Metcalfe. “Basically,” Metcalfe says, “Gordon wanted me to help DEC develop a local-area network—although it wasn’t called that yet—that wouldn’t fall afoul of Xerox’s Ethernet patents.” The idea was to create an open networking standard that would work with any brand of computer, on the theory that customers would balk if DEC tried to lock them into using its machines exclusively. In the long run, the company would do much better if it allowed everyone to play.

Hmm-tricky. Also dangerous: Metcalfe reflected that his former employer comparatively cheap Alto-style workstation that he’d designed using off-the-shelf parts. Berke ley’s Bill Joy contributed his world-class expertise in Unix. And Stanford MBA classmates Vinod Khosla and Scott McNealy brought their management acumen to the mix. Since Bechtolsheim had originally designed his workstation to run on the campus-wide Stanford University Network, moreover, the foursome decided to take the name of their firm from the network’s initials—thus Sun Microsystems. could afford a lot more lawyers than he could. “So instead,” he says, “I thought, Why not just ask Xerox to cooperate?”

A few discreet inquiries showed that Xerox was game, as was DEC. And so was the semiconductor giant Intel, which was brought into the deal when Metcalfe realized that DEC would need a special chip to implement Ethernet on the VAX. By the summer of 1979, with Metcalfe’s continuing to serve as a consultant, representatives of all three companies were hammering out a proposal to make Ethernet an official, open standard for local-area networking. (“Legally,” notes Metcalfe, “for them to even talk together in the same room, it had to be an open standard.”) And in May 1980 Gordon Bell stood up with representatives of Intel and Xerox to announce the plan publicly: for a onetime licensing fee of a thousand dollars, a company could manufacture as many Ethernet cards, cables, transceivers, and peripherals as it wanted. All it had to do was abide by the specifications, which were now published freely.

This was a highly satisfactory deal for Bell. DEC had an inside track on the emerging standard, which would be duly ratified in 1982. IBM was now eating DEC’s dust, for a change, at least in this market: Big Blue’s “Token Ring” system, which wouldn’t be introduced until October 1985, would forever be a networking also-ran. And most important of all, the VAX had a network. Indeed, the VAX strategy would prove to be a masterstroke for DEC: by the mid-1980s, after some admittedly tumultuous years in the development phase, its integrated line of VAX computers would dominate the scientific and engineering markets, and be making real advances in the business market. The company’s annual revenue from computers would be measured in the billions of dollars, second only to IBM’s—and for a time there would be some who wondered if DEC might one day even surpass IBM.*

Finally, the Ethernet agreement was a very good deal for Metcalfe himself, whose post-PARC career had at last gotten a little focus. Early on in the negotiations he had realized that if Ethernet became a formal, open standard, then the technology might have a market—which meant it was definitely time to start that little company of his own. So in June 1979 he did exactly that, taking the new firm’s name from the three words Computer, Communication, and Compatibility— in short, 3Com. So there it was: the “personal” part of the personal-distributed-computing paradigm was diffusing outward in the form of workstations, while the “distributed” part was doing the same in the form of Ethernet. That left the Smalltalk graphical user interface, together with all the other Alto software—the embodiment of computing as a medium of expression and exploration. But this idea was making * Alas, DEC’s subsequent history would not be so happy, largely because of its weakness in small computers. It’s true that CEO Ken Olsen did change his mind about microcomputers back in the summer of 1980, apparently because an attractive young woman reporter stung its way into the world, too, thanks to a fateful show-and-tell at the very end of the 1970s.

By now, of course, Steve Jobs’s visit to PARC in December of 1979 has long since passed into legend. “Apple’s daylight raid,” as one writer called it, has become one of the founding myths of the personal-computer revolution, the moment when the nimble young Jason snatched the Golden Fleece from the sleeping dragon. Indeed, as reporter Michael Hiltzik pointed out in his 1999 book about PARC, Dealers of Lightning, the mythology has accumulated to the point of burying the reality almost beyond recovery. “The collective memory of the Jobs visit and of its aftermath is so vivid that some former PARC scientists are no longer sure whether they were there themselves, or just heard about it later,” as he put it.!°

Nonetheless, Hiltzik’s book includes perhaps the most careful and complete reconstruction of the event to date, and it makes a number of key points. First, Jobs and his crew didn’t need a special presentation to learn about graphical user interfaces. That idea was already in the air by 1979, along with everything else PARC had done. Since October 1978, in fact, Apple had been working in secret on a next-generation machine called the Lisa, after Jobs’s out-of-wedlock daughter. The 16-bit Lisa featured a bit-mapped graphics screen and, by December 1979, a windowing interface that could be controlled by a mouse. The project was chaotic and unfocused, to be sure, and the interface was clumsy. But it was there.

Second, the dragon wasn’t asleep, or even hostile. Quite the opposite: Xerox had courted Apple shamelessly. Or more precisely, the Xerox Development Corporation had. XDC was yet another Xerox subsidiary, recently founded in West Hollywood to make venture-capital investments in promising young firms. Moreover, XDC’s director, Abe Zarem, knew exactly what PARC had—and how ineptly its parent company was handling it. His plan was to license PARC’s technology to one of these lean and hungry start-ups instead, and then let the kids commercialize it. So in the spring of 1979, when he learned that Apple was raising $7 million with a private stock sale to major institutional investors (the company hadn’t gone public yet), Zarem wanted in, and badly. his pride by asking why his company was so far behind in that market. But the multimillion dollar catch-up effort that resulted proved to be poorly planned and poorly coordinated. By the time DEC’s first microcomputers appeared, in mid-1983, they were widely perceived as late, overpriced, and disappointing. Within a few years, having lost some $900 million, DEC effectively abandoned the effort, and Olsen went back to bad-mouthing microcomputers as cheap toys.

By the early 1990s, however, as high-end PCs and workstations began to make serious inroads among former VAX users, the company was paying dearly for that attitude. In 1992 the DEC board of directors regretfully, respectfully, but firmly asked Ken Olsen to resign. But even after he did so, the company was never able to do better than hold its own, despite heroic efforts; the world was moving too fast, thanks to the Internet, and rivals such as Sun had too much of a head start. In January 1998 DEC agreed to be bought by the PC manufacturer Compaga. In effect, it no longer exists.

Third, the hero wasn’t quite as nimble as the legends would have it. Initially, at least, Jobs greeted Zarem’s overture with contempt, not an unusual response from him. What could a sclerotic bureaucracy like Xerox do that his own team couldn’t do better and faster? Partly, this reaction was a function of his counter cultural disdain for large corporations in general. (The scruffily bearded Jobs wore his T-shirts, jeans, and sandals like a badge of honor.) And partly it was attributable to his memory of Steve Wozniak’s former employer, Hewlett-Packard, which had once rebuffed Woz’s proposal for a microcomputer. But in any case, Jobs changed his mind after repeated urging by Apple engineer Jef Raskin, who had joined the company to help design the Apple II. Raskin had visited PARC, as it happened, and his friends there had shown him its wonders.

So on April 2, 1979, Jobs and his team met with the XDC people and struck a deal that could make sense only in the go-go world of Silicon Valley: Xerox would be allowed to invest $1.05 million in Apple’s private stock sale, and in return it would allow Apple full access to PARC’s technology. Jobs had only the vaguest idea of what that involved, evidently. But his engineers were specifically interested in the inner workings of Smalltalk, which they hoped would help them with the Lisa interface.

Fourth, the presentation wasn’t a naive giveaway by the Smalltalk team. Granted, Alan Kay himself might have embraced the Apple group as saviors if he’d been there; certainly he had abandoned any hope of seeing Xerox bring PARC’s technology to market. But Kay had recently gone off to Los Angeles on a long-promised sabbatical, partly to be with a new girlfriend and partly to “take organ lessons,” and the interim team leader, Adele Goldberg, still harbored some hope that Xerox would come through. To her mind, this “alliance” with Apple was potential suicide for PARC. So when Jobs and his top engineers finally showed up for an afternoon visit in December 1979, the presentation was as minimal as Goldberg could make it. She and her Smalltalk colleagues gave Jobs and company the standard visitor’s tour: the Alto, the mouse, Bravo word processing, some drawing programs—nothing that the whole world hadn’t seen before. And afterward their guests departed, apparently satisfied.

Two days later, having realized almost at once that they’d been shortchanged, Jobs and his crew showed up in the PARC lobby with no advance warning. They wanted to see the good stuff, they said—now.

There ensued several hours of argument between the Smalltalk team and its bosses. But in the end, after a direct order, with Xerox headquarters’ backing up XDC, a red-faced Goldberg did indeed show Jobs and his people the good stuff. This included education applications written by Goldberg herself, programming tools created by Larry Tesler, and animation tools cooked up by Diana Merry for combining pictures and text in a single document-—all of it hitherto top-secret material that showed off Smalltalk’s capabilities to the fullest. Just as Goldberg had feared, moreover, Jobs’s engineers were asking very detailed questions; they seemed to have read everything the Smalltalk team had ever published.

The climactic moment came when Jobs pointed out that Smalltalk scrolled through text one full line at a time, which made its action rather jerky; he wondered aloud if it couldn’t scroll continuously, one bit-mapped pixel at a time. Sure, said Dan Ingalls, Smalltalk’s lead programmer. He opened a window, changed a few lines of the scrolling code, then closed the window again, and voila! Through the modular magic of object-oriented programming, Smalltalk now scrolled continuously.

The visitors were blown away. “Why hasn’t this company brought this to market?” Jobs famously shouted, waving his arms around while his engineers did their best to ignore him and focus on how the system worked. “What’s going on here? I don’t get it!”

By the time the Apple team finally departed, according to Jobs’s later account, he was a “raving maniac”: he had seen the future. According to legend, moreover, he immediately ordered that the Lisa be reconfigured to match the Alto display.

But in reality, Hiltzik concluded in his book, the visit didn’t have all that much impact on the Lisa—or not directly, anyway. Apple’s partnership with Xerox fell apart soon afterward, the victim of a culture clash that was just too extreme. Lisa’s chief programmer, Bill Atkinson, had to re-create most of what he’d seen on his own.

Indirectly, though, the visit did give energy and focus to a project that badly needed both of those things. More important, it was an epiphany for Jobs and his whole team: from now on Apple would follow the gospel according to Smalltalk. “Lisa must be fun to use,” declared a project design manifesto written a month or so after the show-and-tell. “Special attention must be paid to the friendliness of the user interaction and the subtleties that make using the Lisa rewarding and job-enriching.”!® In short, PARC’s lead was dwindling fast by the end of the 1970s. Still, things were looking up a bit. Slowly, painfully, but inexorably, the hegemony of the former Ford accountants was coming to an end at Xerox, and the company was at last beginning to move.

The turning point, ironically enough, had been the infamous Boca Raton meeting in November 1977. However futile PARC’s “Futures Day” demonstration may have seemed at the time, Boca was also where the higher-ups had admitted publicly what by now was obvious to all: the strict bottom-line mentality was a disaster, even in the company’s core business in copiers.

Xerox’s newest offerings were widely considered unimaginative, unreliable, overpriced, and mediocre in terms of performance. Upstart Japanese firms were offering better machines for less, thereby taking over the low-end copier market. And IBM and Kodak were likewise coming on strong in the high-end market, introducing fast new machines of their own. A few months before, in fact, when Xerox president Archie McCardell had left to head up International Harvester, the board had decided that his successor would be David Kearns—not a former Ford man but a former IBM marketing executive who seemed to have a much better feel for real technology, and a genuine determination to transform Xerox’s corporate culture from the inside out. The company’s top management had become remote, closed-minded, indecisive, and out of touch, Kearns had declared in his speech at Boca, where many of his listeners were hearing him for the first time. “We have to change,” he added, “and fast.”!”

True, the company’s transformation would be anything but “fast” by Silicon Valley standards. Moreover, the effort would keep the Xerox higher-ups tightly focused on copiers and Japan, not computers and PARC; the wizards in Palo Alto would still have a very hard time getting their undivided attention. But by the mid-1980s Xerox would indeed be a new company: slimmed down, decentralized, reinvigorated, armed with a whole new generation of advanced copiers, and fighting back the Japanese challenge on every front. And along the way, whether by accident or by design, the new regime would slowly begin to remove the obstacles that kept PARC’s technology imprisoned in the lab.

Only a short time after the Boca Raton meeting, for example, Kearns and board chairman Peter McColough heeded the entreaties of their research chief, Jack Goldman, and approved an attack on one of the most formidable of those barriers: the incomprehension and mistrust of PARC’s accomplishments within the rest of Xerox itself. Responsibility for this initiative went to PARC’s Jerry Elkind, who would head up yet another new organization, called the Advanced Systems Division. (Elkind’s erstwhile deputy, Bob Taylor, at last got a title to match what he had tacitly been all along: director of PARC’s Computer Science Laboratory.)* “The division’s charter was to get some market experience with ‘beta test’ versions of the technology at customer sites,” explains Elkind. And indeed, within a year or so of their start-up in January 1978, he and his colleagues had installed Altos, laser printers, and all the necessary Ethernet connections at a major test site in the Santa Clara offices of Xerox’s copier sales force—as well as at the Atlantic Richfield Company, in the U.S. Senate, and in Jimmy Carter’s White House. True, Elkind’s group still had no brief to go beyond “beta test” marketing, a constraint they found increasingly irksome. (At one point in late 1978, they prepared a formal proposal to market the Alto for real, but Kearns, distracted by the Japanese challenge, turned it down.) Nonetheless, they proved that ordinary customers really would pay for what PARC had created. They obtained invaluable feedback on the software from a host of nontechnical, real-world users, which improved the system greatly. And along the way, by letting people directly experience what PARC had wrought, they began to enlist some strong allies inside Xerox. “Despite all the mis* Elkind’s departure from CSL had not been a happy one. Certain top researchers there had simply refused to work with him anymore, declaring that his habit of injecting his own technical judgments into the discussion had alienated too many people to allow him to continue as leader. Elkind himself refuses to discuss the matter, but George Pake, for one, has always believed that the revolt was a coup secretly orchestrated by Taylor himself. Taylor swears he was not involved, insisting that the rebellion was as much of a surprise to him as to anyone takes at the top, there was actually a lot of support for the Alto at the grass-roots level in the company,” notes George Pake. “A lot of people could see that something important was happening. For example, the public-relations people thought it was great for our public image. They felt it built up interest in the company and helped in recruiting.”

In 1979, meanwhile, an even tougher barrier crumbled when Office Systems chief Bob Potter followed his former boss, Archie McCardell, to International Harvester. Happily for PARC, Kearns’s choice to replace Potter as head of the Dallas operation was the thirty-four-year-old Don Massaro, an energetic Silicon Valley veteran who definitely understood digital technology: he had been a cofounder of the computer disk-drive maker Shugart Associates, which Xerox had purchased in 1977. Brash, cocky, profane, and willing to take risks, Massaro drove his abruptly reenergized division hard, to the point where it would ultimately bring out seven new products in less than three years. And in November 1979, when David Liddle came to Dallas to show him what PARC had been up to, he was ready to listen.

Liddle (pronounced Li-DELL) was an equally hard-driving young PARC veteran who had taken over the northern California office of Steve Lukasik’s old System Development Division several years earlier. Liddle was actually rather skeptical about slogging down to Dallas yet again, having made this same pitch to Bob Potter any number of times before, with no success. Then, too, his organization had been whipsawed through the Xeroxian labyrinth mercilessly— now part of this group, now part of that—and some of his best people were leaving in exasperation.

Still, this new guy was supposed to be a techie for a change, and Liddle had plenty to show him. As soon as he took the System Development Division job, Liddle had enticed Chuck Thacker and a number of others to follow him across Coyote Hill Road and start development on a prototype commercial Alto that they had code-named the Star. And now, despite some struggles with the hardware, that project was going quite well. Indeed, the Star software was a work of art. The system had a Smalltalk-like user interface, with windows, icons, and menus that could be manipulated by a mouse. It had a fully integrated suite of applications for everything a professional might need, including documents, business graphics, tables, personal databases, and electronic mail. And perhaps most important, considering the Star’s intended, nontechnical audience, the software made the “computerness” of it all as invisible as possible. The icons pictured real-world objects such as file folders, in- and out-boxes, a wastepaper basket, and a telephone, the idea being to make the meaning of each icon obvious at a glance. Moreover, the applications were fixed, always loaded, and, through the magic of object-oriented programming, automatically associated with data files; in principle, at least, users could focus on what they were doing without (and indeed, other accounts support that contention). Either way, the business left a sour taste in everyone’s mouth. having to know anything about such concepts as operating systems, applications, or even software. Meanwhile, of course, every machine would also have a built-in Ethernet connection, giving its user instant access to file servers, laser printers, and the like. The system would be a system: personal distributed computing in full.

Thirty minutes into Liddle’s demonstration, Massaro told him he could turn off his machine: “I’m already convinced.”!® Or as he later told an interviewer, “I said, ‘Fuck it! This is incredible technology, and we’re going to bring it to the marketplace!’ ”!?

They did. On April 27, 1981, at the National Computer Conference in Chicago, the Star was introduced to the world as the Xerox 8010 Information System. It was a sensation; many of the attendees had never even seen a bit-mapped screen, let alone one that measured seventeen inches diagonally. Demonstrations were given every hour, with people overflowing into the aisles to marvel at the graphical user interface—among them a contingent from Apple, who watched every demo and then retreated into a corner to discuss what they had seen.

And yet within a depressingly short time after this introduction, it became clear that all the brilliance wasn’t going to be good enough. The Star wasn’t a failure, exactly; its sales figures were reasonably good, especially in the Fortune 500 market it was targeted to. But it was shaping up to be a niche product at best, losing out to those ridiculous micros. For Chuck Thacker, that realization hit home just four months after the Star’s introduction when he saw the IBM PC, in August 1981. “I knew we’d lost because the PC’s price was right,” he says. “Here was a reasonably capable machine that wouldn’t take a substantial fraction of my month’s salary.” For Butler Lampson, acceptance didn’t come until early 1983, when Apple finally came out with its Lisa: “It was clear by then that Xerox had blown it,” he says. For Jerry Elkind, the moment of truth came a year or so after that, when Xerox was designing a major software upgrade for the Star, called ViewPoint. “I was heading up the planning for that product,” he explains. “We made the decision that there had to be an option for it to run IBM PC software. We also decided to put a VisiCalc clone on that machine. And that was the admission that we were not going to be dominant in the marketplace.”

Whenever the realization came, however, this was easily the saddest page in the whole PARC story. The young visionaries who had gathered there had participated in one of the great sagas of the information age, the creation of the first modern personal computer. And yet that saga had now become one of the great cautionary tales. Despite a decade’s head start and more, history was passing them by. The business writers Douglas K. Smith and Robert C. Alexander said it all in the title of their 1988 account, Fumbling the Future: How Xerox Invented, Then Ignored, the First Personal Computer. Indeed, in the pop mythology of the personal-computer era, the story of PARC and the Alto has become an endlessly repeated classic: visionary genius stifled by leaden bureaucracy.

And yet many of the PARC veterans themselves now see the situation a bit differently. The fact is, they believe, they finally had a chance, and they blew it.

Remember, says Butler Lampson: despite all the incomprehension that headquarters showed in the early days, and despite all the mistakes that the higher-ups undoubtedly made with the Star (perhaps the most notable being that the copier sales force was turned loose to sell the system without any real training in computers), “the fact is that headquarters had the vision for PARC in the beginning. And they sank a lot of money into the development organization.” In the end, moreover, the higher-ups let Massaro, Liddle, and the research team at the System Development Division shape the Star as they saw fit. “They knew they didn’t understand computers, but they knew they had a great research lab,” says Lampson. “So they figured that the engineers would take care of it.”

And that was the essential tragedy, he says: whereas headquarters understood marketing but not computers, the wizards out on Coyote Hill Road understood computers but not marketing. They had gone into the design process believing fervently in the PARC vision, in personal distributed computing as a whole, integrated system. They knew that it far transcended anything else on the market. And they couldn’t imagine that customers would want anything less. They’d also been given to understand that cost was no constraint: their target was the corporate world, the Fortune 500-scale customers that were used to shelling out hundreds of thousands of dollars for computer equipment.

The result was an unfettered exuberance that led the Star’s designers into at least three critical errors. The first and most obvious was a rampant case of feature-itis: they loaded up the Star software with every neat thing they could think of, until it had grown to roughly a million lines of code and was at the ragged edge of what the 1981-vintage hardware could support. Indeed, that was the first thing users noticed: the Star was painfully, maddeningly sloooow.

A second and more fundamental error was the designers’ decision to make the Star a closed system, meaning that all the hardware and all the software had to come from Xerox. Now, in fairness, this was how most major corporations had always operated. “People thought that that was how you became a serious computer company,” says Jerry Elkind. “Get the customers hooked, and they were yours for life.” In the corporate market that the Star was aiming for, moreover, this was what the customers preferred: they were looking for “turnkey” installations like IBM mainframes (or Xerox copiers), which would be fully functional as soon as they were installed and would forever after be serviced by the vendor.

However, if being closed meant that Xerox could lock in its customers, it also meant that it had to guess right about what those customers wanted; it had no way to tap into the creativity of the wider community. And in at least one instance, the Star’s software designers spectacularly failed to guess right: the Star had no spreadsheet program. Nobody at PARC had ever thought to write one because nobody in a research lab ever needed one. What they did need was a good way to write technical papers—“so we got all caught up with WYSIWYG word processing and printing,” says Elkind. It was precisely the inverse of priorities in the business world. In the executive suites of 1981, word processing was widely considered to be low-level stenographers’ work, whereas a spreadsheet was just the kind of application a manager might use. And the result was another sale for Apple, not for Xerox.

The closed-system approach likewise left potential customers without an inexpensive, low-risk entry path. The Coyote Hill Road designers had implemented the Star system as a seamless whole, and that was the only way Xerox would sell it. So even leaving aside the fact that a single Star workstation cost more than $16,500, or about ten times as much as an Apple II, customers couldn’t buy just a single Star to see what it could do. They had to buy Stars for everyone, along with all the Ethernet cabling, laser printers, and such that went with them; a minimal installation cost at least $100,000. And while there were many Fortune 500 executives who could easily afford that, they were understandably leery of betting their entire operation on a brand-new system, especially when they still weren't too sure what a personal computer was. From the users’ perspective, it was far safer to wait and see—and in the meantime maybe buy a couple of Apple IIs to kick around.

Finally, the third and perhaps most distressing error was that the designers passed up several chances to do something simpler. “The option was open all through the nineteen-seventies,” says Lampson. “We could have shipped something much like the IBM PC, and a short time later shipped something very much like the original Alto.” Starting around 1979, in fact, when the Star development was going through a rough phase, senior hardware developer Bob Belleville had agitated for a fresh start: Let’s forget about the Star platform, he said, and instead get the technology out there quickly by creating a 16-bit microcomputer based on the Motorola 68000 chip, or maybe an Intel 8086. He even built a prototype in the lab to show that it could be done. But the answer was no. “I was one of the people involved in deciding against it,” admits Elkind, “largely because all the software would have had to be rewritten, and we didn’t have the stomach for it.” It would have been too painful, agrees Lampson: “We would have had to scale back too much. [Belleville’s machine] wouldn’t have supported the wonderful things you could do with the Star.”

So there it was: with the best intentions in the world, the researchers on Coyote Hill Road created a product that was lovely to behold—and an also-ran in the marketplace. “We certainly had the idea that computers like the Star would be mass-market items within a decade,” says Lampson. “But we just didn’t pay attention to a business model of how to do it.” And in the end, he says, “the problem wasn’t a shortage of vision at headquarters. If anything, it was an excess of vision at PARC.” Fittingly enough, Larry Tesler was among the first to walk. In the spring of 1980, a few months after the famous visit, Steve Jobs tried to lease Smalltalk for the Lisa. And when Xerox refused (the partnership was already dead by that point), Jobs simply offered to hire Tesler, a Smalltalk team member who had done much of the presentation for the visit. Tesler was receptive, having sensed something stirring in the hobbyist community almost from the beginning. Yes, the garage computers were ridiculously primitive, but people were buying them. And yes, the hobbyists tended to be incredibly naive about what had already been accomplished in computing. But if you actually went to the Homebrew Computer Club meetings—and Tesler was one of the few PARC-ites who regularly attended—you could feel the energy there. The world was full of bright people who didn’t work for PARC, Tesler realized—people who weren’t even part of the ARPA community. And they were learning fast. So he accepted Jobs’s offer and went to Apple, where he would eventually become the company’s chief scientist.

He was soon followed by Bob Belleville, who was still smarting over Xerox’s decision not to pursue his 68000-based alternative to the Star. “Everything you've ever done in your life is terrible,” Steve Jobs shouted at him over the telephone not long after the Star introduction, “so why don’t you come work for me?”° Belleville went on to become chief engineer of Apple’s Macintosh project, the Mac being a perky little micro that would feature a very PARC-like graphical user interface—and, on the inside, the Motorola 68000.

Even Mr. Dynabook himself came over. Alan Kay never returned to PARC after his one-year sabbatical; instead, he had Apple set him up in his own lab in Los Angeles, where he would happily study kids, computers, and learning for more than a decade.

In that same year of 1981, meanwhile, Charles Simonyi headed north to Microsoft, taking with him all his ideas on WYSIWYG word processing; in 1983 the Bravo editor he’d helped create for the Alto reemerged as Microsoft Word. The contrast with the older company was amazing, says Simonyi, who had interviewed for an executive job at Xerox headquarters just before his first visit to the still-tiny empire in Washington State: “It was like going into the graveyard or retirement home before going into the maternity ward. You could see that Microsoft could do things one hundred times faster, literally, I’m not kidding. Six years from that point, we overtook Xerox in market valuation.”?!

While Simonyi and others had been refining WYSISYG, as it happened, years of work on laser printing had been leading to a truly elegant idea: instead of representing a document as just a collection of bits, why not represent it as a program? The printer could then execute the program to generate the final image. This “page-description” language would contain commands to produce text in any font and size, of course, but it would also have instructions for generating lines, curves, textures, color, and the like anywhere on the page. A few lines of code could thus enable the creation of marvelously complex images. In 1980 this idea was embodied in the Interpress system, designed by Butler Lampson and Bob Sproull with the assistance of John Warnock, chief scientist at PARC’s new Imaging Science Lab. Warnock and his boss at that lab, Charles Geschke, would leave PARC in 1982 to found a company called Adobe Systems. There the Interpress idea would be transmuted into a proprietary page-description language named Postscript, which would go on to become a cornerstone of the desktop publishing industry.

Also in 1982, an exasperated Don Massaro would resign as head of Xerox’s Office Systems Division in Dallas after a dispute with Kearns over his sales team. David Liddle would soon resign as well, and together they would found Metaphor Computer Systems, hoping to market applications for workstations— that is, personal-distributed-computer systems like the Star.

And so it would go. For a period in the early 1980s, colleagues seemed to be walking out the door almost daily. And the steady hemorrhage of talent only fueled Bob Taylor’s rage. The Jobs visit had been infuriating enough, he says. He’d been out of town at the time, which was regrettable, “because if I’d been in town, I would have told him to get out. And if he hadn’t, I would have beat the shit out of him. I had no respect for him. Then they [Xerox] would have fired me—and it would have been good for me and for them.”

But far, far worse than that missed opportunity was the knowledge that his group could have changed the world—and that Xerox had let the moment slip by. Most of all, Taylor was convinced, George Pake had let it slip by. The director was their spokesman, says Taylor, their pipeline to all the rest of Xerox, their one real hope of conveying to the higher-ups what they had at PARC. And Pake screwed it up utterly, because he didn’t understand it himself. No, insists Taylor, the best you could say about George Pake was that he was just. . . out of it.

Pake, for his part, does concede one kernel of truth in that indictment: he was out of it, literally. Back in 1978, he explains, in an effort to stop the endless bickering between research chief Jack Goldman and engineering chief Jim O’Neill, Xerox president David Kearns had briefly suggested putting Goldman and all the research centers under O’Neill’s direct authority-PARC included. Since O’Neill’s numbers-obsessed management would have snuffed out the labs’ creativity in very short order, a horrified Goldman had volunteered to fall on his sword: he would let himself be named to the newly created post of “chief scientist,” he told Kearns, while George Pake moved up to take his place. Kearns had bought it; Pake had been the corporate research chief since June 1978.

However, says Pake—and this was the out-of-it part—he had taken the corporate job only on condition that he could do it from California; he couldn’t stand the thought of doing another tour at Xerox headquarters. “Well, the problem of being out here is that you don’t know what the corporate politics are back east until it’s too late,” he says. So yes, despite an ungodly amount of time spent on airplanes, that probably did hamper his effectiveness somewhat.

As for Taylor and his following, though, Pake had his own opinion. “Fairly early on, it felt to me, and the other managers, that CSL was a cult. Bob thought that he understood where computing was going better than anybody else did; he’d come in with the attitude, ‘I understand this, this is how it’s going to be.’ Plus, his management style was to cultivate a siege mentality; he viewed every interaction with another human being as a win-lose situation, and he was determined to be the winner. So it was almost impossible to deflect CSL from the attitude that “We’re right and you’re wrong.’ ” Indeed, he feared that Taylor’s “vision” had become a stultifying orthodoxy, crushing any creative impulse that didn’t fit in with it. And even worse, from Pake’s standpoint, was that Taylor was constantly squabbling with PARC’s other section heads over money. “Taylor wanted their budgets transplanted to him,” says Pake. “Well, I believed in diversity. | didn’t think we should have one point of view. But it was becoming very divisive.”

Pake’s assessment is echoed by many others, both inside and outside PARC. “Bob Taylor is one of the most complex human beings on earth,” says Bob Kahn, who came through PARC fairly often in those years in his capacity as IPTO director. “He saw the world in black-and-white terms: if you were with him, if you were going in a direction he thought worthwhile, then he supported you all the way. But if you weren’t, then whatever you were doing was utterly worthless and contemptible. And if he thought you were actually against him, then he went in with a flame-thrower. No quarter asked or given.” Taylor lived in a world of ones and zeros, agrees SSL member Danny Bobrow, who had done his best over the years to maintain good relations with Taylor’s people. “When I played tennis with him, he’d play every shot as a killer. If you hit a drop shot, he’d get mad; you were supposed to smash it back.”

The inevitable showdown came in late August 1983, when the physicist Bill Spencer, who had been named the director of PARC earlier that year, presented Taylor with a memo detailing a dozen ways in which he was to modify his behavior—along with a demand that he report to the director’s office every Monday morning at nine to discuss his progress toward these goals. Taylor, grossly insulted, refused. A mediation effort by the office of David Kearns himself proved fruitless. On Monday, September 19, Taylor called a CSL meeting in the beanbag room, with Spencer in attendance. After an emotional farewell, he announced his resignation and walked out of the room, to be followed a few moments later by Chuck (“This is budl/shit!”) Thacker. A shaken Spencer was left to face the wrath of fifty people who had just lost the only leader many of them had ever known, along with their top hardware wizard (“You can fucking resign!” he was told by one anonymous shouter).

Spencer himself did not resign, but many others did. By January 1984 Taylor had arranged for DEC to launch a new DEC Systems Research Center in downtown Palo Alto, with himself as director. Many of PARC’s finest soon joined him, a group that included Butler Lampson, Chuck Thacker, and thirteen others. PARC’s computer-research capabilities were devastated and would take years to recover. And the rest, as they say, was history. That magical, integrated vision of personal distributed computing did indeed make its way into the mass market, but only in pieces. And slowly. And with very little of the benefit going to Xerox.

True, when Apple’s Lisa debuted, in 1983, it met with a fate not unlike the Star’s: audiences loved its Smalltalk-inspired interface but were turned off by its pricey hardware and slow performance. Only one year later, however, Apple’s Macintosh hit the sweet spot. It was compact, affordable, friendly, and even sort of... cute. The little machines flew out of the stores and developed a fanatically loyal following that persists to the present day. Then, in 1985, Microsoft, never a company to be left behind, started shipping its Smalltalk-inspired Windows 1.0 for IBM PC compatibles. Two massive revisions later, with the release of Windows 3.0, in 1990, Microsoft also hit the sweet spot, and famously began to make up for lost time. By the end of the 1990s, Windows would overwhelmingly dominate the operating-system market, to the point where the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division would feel compelled to take an interest in Microsoft.

On the communications front, meanwhile, the proliferation of Macs and PC clones was very good news for networking start-ups such as 3Com, which had already begun to prosper by selling Ethernet products for VAXes and workstations. Indeed, the personal-computer revolution was what transformed the Bob Metcalfe of 1979 into the Bob Metcalfe of today: the proud possessor of a farm in Maine, a town house suitable for an embassy in Boston’s tony Back Bay neighborhood, a prestigious second career in technology journalism, and a personal fortune that amounts to a noticeable fraction of Bill Gates’s. “I tell people I didn’t get rich inventing Ethernet,” he says with a laugh. “I got rich selling it!”

Just so—though in truth, the microcomputer market was something of a tough sell in those early days. Partly it was a matter of technology, since the early micros were too feeble to handle network communications very effectively. But much of it was also cultural: back in the hobbyist days of micros, in the 1970s, the emphasis had always been on the individual user and the individual machine. Lots of people had modems, of course, but a permanent network connection, as with Ethernet, was exotic to the point of being incomprehensible. That was why Steve Jobs and his engineers had come away from their infamous visit to PARC having totally missed the significance of the Alto’s Ethernet connection—as Jobs himself would later admit. Indeed, in those days Jobs absolutely despised the idea of networking. Like many of his contemporaries, he felt that tying your machine to someone else’s meant giving up your autonomy—an unthinkable choice for any child of the Me Decade, and a violation of everything that personal computing seemed to stand for. (Legend has it that when Jobs was later asked why the Lisa didn’t have a networking port, he threw a floppy disk at the questioner and snarled, “There’s my fucking network.”)

Such attitudes lingered, with the result’s being that local-area networking didn’t begin to make much headway in the microcomputer market until the micros themselves began to make a serious penetration into the business world—a process that might be called slaughter of the whitecoats, part two.

Back in the 1970s, it seems, computer users in corporate America had been facing much the same frustration faced by researchers such as Steve Wolff: the “whitecoats,” or management information service (MIS) departments, dictated the terms. Big companies relied on mainframes, a few minis here and there, and, for “desktop” applications, lots of dedicated word-processing machines from vendors such as Wang and IBM. You played by the MIS rules or not at all.

Ah, but then the micros came along, the high-tech embodiment of individual autonomy, hands-on control, and freedom—not to mention the source of a spreadsheet application, VisiCalc, that you couldn’t get any other way. Naturally, the MIS types tried to outlaw the things. But it was hopeless; the micros were cheap enough that a manager with any imagination could easily hide them in the petty-cash budget. Within a very few years, the steady trickle of surreptitious Apple IIs had become a flood of IBM PCs, PC clones, and Macs, and the MIS departments had effectively given up. In fairness, they did have a legitimate gripe. With the flood of micros had come a flood of new software, some of it very good—WordPerfect, dBase, and Lotus 1-2-3, for example—but much of it flaky and bug-ridden, and all of it incompatible with most companies existing applications. Too often, the resulting chaos wasted more of a company’s time than it saved. But there was no way to keep personal computers out of the office, especially not when more and more employees were using them at home. So instead the MIS managers bowed to the inevitable and started linking the various PCs together into local-area networks, which let them at least get some of the data moved onto a central server where they could be shared. 3Com had helped jump-start the process in 1982 by being among the first to offer an Ethernet card for the new IBM PC. And the company had prospered accordingly throughout the 1980s and 1990s, as the office norm increasingly came to resemble what Bob Taylor and his crew had first imagined two decades earlier: individual computers, Ethernet networking, digital printing, WYSIWYG text editing and graphics programs, a windowing interface—personal distributed computing in full. JUST DO IT As a rule, says Al Vezza, retirement parties at MIT are low-key affairs. But not this one. On October 4, 1985, when he and Mike Dertouzos threw a retirement dinner for Professor J. C. R. Licklider—Lick had turned seventy that year—some three hundred people showed up and had a blast, with jokes, memories, and testimonials flowing nonstop. Bob Fano told the story of his train trip with Lick in November of 1962, when they had cooked up the whole idea of Proyect MAC on the fly. Bob Taylor talked about the Arpanet, and PARC, and Lick’s hilarious struggles with fractured Greek when he tried to buy a Coke in Athens. Bob Kahn reminisced about Lick’s second tour at ARPA. Mike Dertouzos cited his kindness and good advice. It went on and on, says Vezza; the acrimony that had followed Lick’s unhappy directorship of Proyect MAC had long since been forgotten. “Lick was accepted for who he was: an extremely important person in the computer field.”

That was news to Stuart Malone, who had been listening to the tributes with growing astonishment as he waited to give his own testimonial, slated to be the last of the evening. “When I was an undergraduate,” says Malone, meaning the previous two or three years, “Lick was just a nice guy in a corner office who gave us all a wonderful chance to become involved with computers.”

Their relationship had started in the summer of 1982, he explains. “Al Vezza, Lick, and the older generation of hackers there felt that something was being lost in MIT’s electrical-engineering and computer-science curricula. Students didn’t have hands-on experience with computers anymore; the courses were all theoretical.” At the same time, he says, MIT had launched Project Athena, a massive effort to provide network connections all over campus, along with easy access to high-end workstations for everyone. “But because of the central system management, and the high-level security to keep things under control—well, Athena meant more computers, but paradoxically, it made computers more remote.”

Thus the “Hacker Farm,” a program that funded undergraduates to come and get their hands dirty alongside the professionals in Tech Square. “There was a core group of about six of us who were in the first round and who were actually living in the same dorm,” says Malone. “We wound up in the part of the Hacker Farm that was located with the Dynamic Modeling group on the second floor, right near Lick’s office. Around our second year, in fact, when LCS got money for a major remodeling of the second floor, Lick insisted that the undergraduates get a space of our own and that we get to design it ourselves. So we chose a large open area in the center of the building and did it up with green carpets and blue walls, so that it would look as much as possible like the outdoors. We called it the Meadow, after the ‘Bloom County’ comic strip. Lick’s office was right across from that.

“Meanwhile,” Malone continues, “about the same time that Athena was being set up, there was a parallel effort by DEC to experiment with personal computing, to learn what it would be like to have one computer per person. So they donated twenty VAX/750s. We helped uncrate them; they were about the size of washing machines. Lick stretched the rules and got one assigned to the undergraduates. The staffers and professors were naming their machines after beers: Heineken, Molson, XX—Dos Equis—and so on. But since we were all under the drinking age in Massachusetts, we named ours Grape Nehi. Lick later got a MicroVAX and named it ClassiCola, which we felt was a vote of solidarity. Also, since we were sharing a computer, we needed a group name so we could share files. It had to be one word in lower case because we were using Unix, so someone came up with lixkids.

“Anyway, as we started doing serious development on Grape Nehi, we started running out of disk space. Lick had no hesitation: he pulled out a catalog and bought the best Misubishi disk drive available. Also the fastest controller. The first we heard of it was the day he walked in and said, ‘Here it is!’"—and went home. Well, the thing weighed forty pounds. There was no case, just a raw drive. It was supposed to be rack-mounted, and we had no rack. The documentation was obviously translated from the Japanese. So we hauled it up to the ninth floor and got an old rack from somewhere. But the holes on the rack didn’t line up with the holes on the drive. So we had to drill new holes. Then the controller was a different brand from the drive; we had to reyumper it with raw wires. At any time we could have fried the thing—we could have fried Grape Nehi! It was a miracle we didn’t. I don’t know how many days it was before we got it working. But we did, and Lick was impressed. He told us much later that he’d fully expected to have to hire an expert to install this thing. But he’d decided to let us try first because he knew it would be a learning experience. He figured that the money was better spent in training us to use the equipment, and to gain confidence, than in bringing in an outside expert. Lick considered that that was what we were there for.”

The lixkids group stayed together until they all began to graduate, says Malone, which in his case was in 1984; since then he’d been working at Infocom. But none of that experience had prepared him for what he was now seeing at Lick’s retirement party. “What amazed me was how many generations of people he influenced,” says Malone. “There were people there from Hewlett-Packard, from DEC-from all over the place, all standing up and crediting Lick with giving them a chance to do their best work. It was a universal feeling.”

That it was, agrees David Burmaster, who had been watching the proceedings with much the same feeling of astonishment. “Id felt I was the only one,” he says, thinking of his days as Lick’s assistant during the Proyect MAC years. “That somehow Lick and I had had this mystical bond, and nobody else. Yet during that evening I saw that there were two hundred people in the room, three hundred people, and that all of them felt that way. Everybody Lick touched felt that he was their hero and that he had been an extraordinarily important person in their life.”

It was a magical moment, adds Burmaster—and never more so than when Stuart Malone finally got his chance to speak. “They’d started with some of the older group, sort of the Bob Taylor types, and then worked down until the last speaker, an undergraduate [Malone] who stood up and said, ‘I’m one of Lick’s Kids!’ Then the other kids in the room—there were about twenty—got up and cheered. It just knocked the socks off everybody. That’s when we all realized what had drawn us to that evening and what we all felt.”

Lick, for his part, was deeply touched by the testimonials, even as he enjoyed the party hugely. But he was rather abashed as well. Praise always embarrassed him. And besides, as many people there could attest, Lick had never been one to dwell on the past—not when he could have so much fun exploring the future. After his retirement, Lick still kept a lab at Tech Square (as did many other emeritus faculty members), and he still went in as often as he could to play around with graphical programming. He likewise made a point of attending the faculty lunches on Thursdays, where he would often have an extremely penetrating and/or very funny remark to make. And of course, Lick still let the undergraduates coming through the Hacker Farm program have the run of his office. “Those kids literally lived in those rooms,” remembers Louise Licklider. “He made visitors from Washington sit in a little cubbyhole so that the lixkids wouldn’t have to leave his office.”

And yet for all the joy he took in his work, not even Lick could slow the calendar. “He’d lost energy,” says Tracy Licklider. “I don’t remember exactly when he was diagnosed with Parkinson’s, but the tremors were becoming more obvious in the late nineteen-eighties. He’d had a mentor at Washington University who'd had Parkinson’s and had become helpless. Dad had gone to see him a lot and was devastated by the experience.” At the time Lick had been terrified that the same thing might one day happen to him—and now that fear had come true.

His asthma was growing worse as well. “He realized that time was running out,” says his son. “And yet the generation of new ideas, of things that seemed worthwhile to work on, showed no signs of stopping. So it was very frustrating. He especially felt sad that he didn’t have the energy to get involved with this new PC world. Clearly the marketplace momentum was unstoppable.” Indeed, the computer was slowly, painfully, but unmistakably being reinvented yet again, this time as a window into cyberspace. “Dad looked at CompuServe, Prodigy, and all these bulletin-board sites as being a manifestation of the vision [of the Multinet], at least in some demonstration sense.”

The question was whether Lick himself would live to see the Promised Land become anything more tangible than a blur on the distant horizon. But here the news was also heartening, if a bit disconcerting. Down in Washington, the leadership that Lick had once despaired of was finally beginning to emerge—though once again, it was coming from a direction he never would have predicted. Actually, if anyone at Lick’s retirement party had asked him for odds on the emergence of the Internet/Multinet/whatever as of October 1985, he probably would have said that the prospects looked as dismal as ever.

True, the Internet now existed in reality, not just on paper: the Kahn-Cerf internetworking protocols had become the official standard of the Defense Department in 1980, and the Arpanet itself had switched over to TCP/IP on January 1, 1983—an event that many would call the actual birth of the Internet. Moreover, Vint Cerf had arranged to have the protocols implemented in as many operating systems as possible, Unix most definitely included. But by 1985 the department had also lost its two strongest champions of networking: Cerf had departed for MCI several years earlier—among other things, to create a service called MCI Mail—and Bob Kahn himself was in the process of leaving to form his own consulting firm, the Corporation for National Research Initiatives. And in their absence, ARPA seemed to be cutting back sharply on network research. In 1983, the Reagan administration’s new ARPA director, Robert Cooper, had taken Kahn’s ideas for ramping up basic research on artificial intelligence and machine architectures and turned them into a massive, agency-wide “Strategic Computing Initiative” that would ultimately cost almost $1 billion. Every office in the agency had been given a piece of it (much to Kahn’s disgust; that was one of the reasons he was leaving). And in the face of all that, networking research per se just wasn’t a priority anymore; the Defense Department would continue to operate the Arpanet as a service to the ARPA research community, but that was it.

Outside the DoD, meanwhile, the on-line world was more fragmented than ever. Not only were the commercial vendors still pushing their own incompatible networking systems, but there was now a rival imternetworking protocol as well: the Open Systems Interconnection (OSJ) standard, developed by the International Standards Organization starting in 1977. The impetus had come mainly from that organization’s European members, which found TCP/IP a little too messy and ad hoc for their tastes—and were loath to go along with a standard defined by the U.S. Department of Defense in any case. If nothing else, such a standard threatened to give American companies too much of a head start on commercial applications. It’s true that the full OSI standard as published in 1984 existed only on paper. But it was nonetheless “official,” having been blessed with ISO’s seal of approval, and many people in the field believed that TCP/IP use would quickly die out as the new standard ramped up, the Defense Department’s support notwithstanding. By 1985, in fact, the National Institute of Standards and Technology and several other federal agencies had bought that argument and formally adopted OSI as their internetworking standard.

Back on campus, the disarray was even worse. Inspired by the ARPA community’s success with the Arpanet—and by the manifest power of E-mail—other research groups had spent the 1970s lobbying for networks built by their own funding agencies. Thus there was now one network for the researchers working in the Department of Energy’s magnetic-fusion energy program, another for the same agency’s high-energy physicists, and yet a third for the NASA-funded space physicists. At one point MIT had as many as sixteen different networks coming into campus, none of which could communicate with any of the others. Moreover, not only were these academic networks incompatible in a technical sense—in that some were based on DEC’s networking technology, some on IBM’s, and so on—but they were also typically restricted to users in one specific discipline. Even the one exception proved the rule: Bitnet, the “Because It’s Time” network created by Ira Fuchs and Greydon Freeman at New York University in 1981, had as its goal to be open to everyone in the academic community, regardless of discipline—but it could connect only those sites that had IBM mainframes.

In short, networking was just as balkanized as, half a decade earlier, Lick had feared it would be, with many researchers still lacking network access of any kind. The only bright spot was that unexpected glimmer of leadership from the National Science Foundation.

Now, the irony here was that the hard-core computer mavens had never had much respect for the NSF. Compared to ARPA even in its “defense relevance” era, the foundation seemed to be hopelessly risk-averse and politicized. Unlike their ARPA counterparts, for example, NSF funding officers had to submit every proposal to “peer review” by a panel of working scientists, in a tedious decisionby-committee process that (allegedly) quashed anything but the most conventional ideas. Furthermore, the NSF had a reputation for spreading its funding around to small research groups all over the country, a practice that (again allegedly) kept Congress happy but most definitely made it harder to build up a Project MAC-style critical mass of talent in any one place. And worst of all, from the computerists’ point of view, was that the NSF’s support for computing had always been anemic at best, particularly in comparison with ARPA’s. In the early 1970s, in fact, the agency had even stopped funding campus computer centers, which had left a lot of universities with aging machines and no money to upgrade them.

Still, the NSF was the only funding agency chartered to support the research community as a whole. Moreover, it had a long tradition of undertaking projects such as the Kitt Peak National Observatory and the U.S. Antarctic research bases—big infrastructure efforts that served large segments of the community in common. And on those rare occasions when the auspices were good, the right people were in place, and the planets were lined up just so, it was an agency where great things could happen.

Certainly that was the case with the Internet, which not only survived but went on to achieve its stunning growth in the 1990s largely thanks to NSF’s efforts in the 1980s.

The impetus for the foundation’s first foray into networking had come from computer scientists at the “have-not” universities, who were sick of being shut out of the Arpanet. By the late 1970s it was painfully obvious that the Net made it much easier for their colleagues at the “have” schools to share results and collaborate with one another, which in turn made it much easier for them to advance their research. So in 1979, with Larry Landweber of the University of Wisconsin and David Farber of the University of Delaware taking the lead, the have-nots started lobbying the NSF to finance some form of equal access to the Arpanet. And in January 1981 the agency duly launched CSnet, the Computer Science Network. “This was actually a seminal program,” says Steve Wolff, who would later become the NSF’s networking chief. “Not only did CSnet open up the Arpanet to the entire computer-science community, but it was the first instance of shared use by anyone.” In the process, moreover, the TCP/IP protocol—for that was what CSnet used—began to expand beyond its ghetto in the Defense Department.

More significantly, CSnet also set the stage for the NSF’s next networking initiative. The impetus in this case came specifically from physicists, who were increasingly finding themselves faced with problems such as condensed-matter phase transitions, black-hole astrophysics, and quantum chromodynamics (the behavior of quarks inside a proton or neutron)—ultramessy situations in which pencil-and-paper analyses were hopeless. Massive computer simulations seemed to be the only way for researchers to make any progress at all. And yet because state-of-the-art supercomputers such as the Cray were far too expensive for most universities, scientists who wanted to pursue these kinds of issues were being forced to beg snippets of time from national laboratories such as Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore, for which the Department of Energy was buying supercomputers by the dozens for nuclear-weapons development. It was humiliating, not to mention incredibly inefficient. So in the early 1980s, led by Larry Smarr of the University of Illinois and Nobel laureate Kenneth Wilson of Cornell, the physicists started agitating for the NSF to set up a system of national supercomputer centers that would function like the national observatories—that is, individual scientists would be awarded blocks of computer time on the machines in much the same way that individual astronomers were awarded blocks of observing time on the Kitt Peak telescopes. In 1985 the NSF duly launched five such supercomputer centers, at Illinois, Cornell, Princeton, Carnegie Mellon, and the University of California at San Diego. And with those national centers came a national network.

The planners had penciled it in from the beginning, explains Steve Wolff: after all, why make the users travel hundreds or thousands of miles just to submit their programs when they could do it far more quickly and cheaply on-line? But then as soon as anyone thought about it, he says, “the idea of using the network only to contact the supercomputer centers lasted about fifteen microseconds. It was instantly apparent that the network could be a tool for general scientific communication. So the NSF network from the beginning was designed for access by the general community of scholars. Certainly it would include everyone at the universities. And around the periphery, it would try to include K-through-Twelve education, museums—anything having to do with science education.”

True, says Wolff, the creation of such a network exceeded the foundation’s mandate by several light-years. But since nobody actually said no—well, they just did it.

Next, he says, in the process of implementing the scheme, the foundation’s new Networking Office made two critical decisions. The first came from the office’s founder, Dennis Jennings, who ruled in 1985 that the NSF system would be based on TCP/IP. The federal agencies that had already adopted the OSI “standard” had pressured Jennings hard to go that route as well, even though OSI hadn’t yet been implemented anywhere. “But a lot of us in the TCP/IP community were jawboning, too,” says Wolff, who was then still at Aberdeen. “We were successful because we could demonstrate that our specification was open, that it had been implemented by any number of manufacturers, and that it was compatible with the most popular operating system of the time, Unix.” (Indeed, TCP/IP was now incorporated into virtually all the commercial operating systems, even though IBM, DEC, and the other vendors had had to grit their corporate teeth to make it so; they still wanted to push their own proprietary networks, but the Defense Department was just too important a customer to ignore.) Besides, TCP/IP meant instant access to the Arpanet-CSnet combination, which was where all the computer scientists were already; it would just be a matter of linking through a standard gateway.

So anyway, says Wolff, NSFnet became operational in 1986, the same year he replaced Jennings as head of the Networking Office. (Like the Arpanet, NSFnet ran over high-capacity transmission lines leased from the telephone companies.) And the immediate result was an explosion of on-campus networking, with growth rates that were like nothing anyone had imagined. Across the country, those colleges, universities, and research laboratories that hadn’t already taken the plunge began to install local-area networks on a massive scale, almost all of them compatible with (and having connections to) the long-distance NSFnet. And for the first time, large numbers of researchers outside the computer-science departments began to experience the addictive joys of electronic mail, remote file transfer, and data access in general.

“When the original NSFnet went up, in nineteen eighty-six, it could carry fifty-six kilobits per second, like Arpanet,” says Wolff. “By nineteen eighty-seven it had collapsed from congestion.” A scant two years earlier there had been maybe a thousand host computers on the whole Internet, Arpanet included. Now the number was more like ten thousand, and climbing rapidly. With the packets mired in gridlock and users complaining loudly, Wolff and his colleagues hurriedly laid plans to boost their network’s capacity by a factor of 30, to 1.5 megabits per second. (In AT&T parlance it would be a T1 line.) Again, they didn’t really have the authority; they just did it. The upgraded service took effect on July 1, 1988—and usage exploded again, soaring from seventy-five million packets a day toward a billion packets a day. In 1991 Wolff and company would have to boost the NSFnet’s capacity by yet another factor of 30, to “T3” speeds of 45 megabits per second.

In the midst of all this, meanwhile, NSF was getting penciled in for an even wider role, courtesy of the junior senator from Tennessee. As chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Albert Gore, Jr., was widely acknowledged as one of the very few American politicians who took the time to understand technology; he had even been known to show up at meetings of the National Academy of Sciences from time to time, just to listen to the technical sessions. He had been an enthusiastic supporter of NSF’s supercomputer centers, and now he was even more intrigued by this notion of digital networks as a continent-spanning infrastructure. (He’d been mulling over that notion for some time, apparently: earlier in the decade he had coined the phrase “Information Superhighway,” as an analogy to the Interstate Highway System that his father had helped create back in the 1950s, when se was in the Senate.) So in 1986 Gore wrote legislation asking the administration to study the possibility of networking the supercomputer centers with fiber optics.

The request couldn’t have come at a better time. The NSF was just then consolidating all its computer-related efforts, including Wolff’s Networking Office and the supercomputer centers, into a brand-new directorate headed by one Gordon Bell, the former chief engineer of DEC. And Bell, as hyperkinetic as ever, saw this as a priceless opportunity to promote his vision of the Internet as the VAX strategy writ large: a “fractal” network of networks that would be self similar from the scale of the planet down to the scale of a microchip. ARPA offcials, for their part, likewise saw Gore’s request as a priceless opportunity to advance their own Strategic Computing Initiative. Then the Energy Department and NASA saw—well, anyway, by the time the dust had settled in late 1987, Gore found himself looking at a thick, multiagency report advocating a government wide assault on computer technology across the board. First, said the report, Congress should fund a multiyear, billion-dollar initiative in high-performance computing, with the goal of creating machines in the 1990s whose performance would be measured in teraflops, or trillions of operations per second. When it came to “grand challenges” such as modeling the dynamics of protein molecules or global climate changes, nothing less would do. Second, said the report, Congress should fund an equally ambitious National Research and Education Network, with the goal of moving packets around the country in the 1990s at speeds measured in gigabits, or billions of bits per second.

Gore was dumbfounded. All he’d asked for was a short study on the use of fiber optics to connect the supercomputer centers. This was so much... more. Then, too, he was a tad distracted at the time by his first, abortive run for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. Nonetheless, after he held hearings on the report in August 1988, and heard spokesmen such as Bob Kahn, Len Kleinrock, and many others make the case, he was a convert. Before the year was out he had introduced a bill to fund both initiatives fully. With respect to networking, in particular, the Gore bill gave ARPA the leading role in developing the next-generation gigabit technology, while it put NSF in charge of deploying and maintaining a network based on the best current-generation technology. That is, the NSF would keep on doing exactly what it was doing already, except that now it would be doing it on behalf of the entire federal government and the entire university system.

Very quickly, it’s true, the Gore bill ran into flak from the White House, where Republican budget officials argued that such initiatives ought to be left to the private sector. The high-performance-computing half of the proposal wouldn’t be passed and signed into law until December 1991. And the networking half wouldn’t be added until early 1993, when a newly inaugurated President Bill Clinton would sign a second Gore bill turning the effort into the High Performance Computing and Communication program, or HPCC. (By that point, of course, Gore himself had gone on to higher office.) But then, the delay hardly mattered: down at the working level, the agencies had quietly been setting up a de facto national network on their own.

“We just found it more useful to cooperate than to fight,” explains Chuck Brownstein, who was Gordon Bell’s deputy at the NSF computer directorate. Nobody could afford it otherwise. “The networking part of our programs kept getting bigger and bigger,” he says. “So finally the program people from ARPA, NSF, NASA, and the Energy Department—the Steve Wolff types—got together and formed a shadow organization: the Federal Research Internet Coordinating Committee.” The FRICC would later be reconstituted more officially as the Federal Networking Council, but in the mid-1980s it was a wonderfully ad hoc affair, reminiscent of the beer-and-pretzel get-togethers that Lick had organized back in his first ARPA term. “This FRICC group was like a virtual agency: they didn’t agree on everything, but if they came up with a good idea, they would go out and find the money in somebody’s budget to do it. So we started doing things like sharing the cost of overseas lines, or putting in exchanges to interconnect our networks.” And then when the first Gore bill kept falling off the table, he says, the networking chiefs just kept on coordinating their activities and drafting their budgets as if the program were already official. After all, they were the ones who had mostly written the report that had gone to Gore in the first place.

Along the way the agencies had also begun to consolidate their various networks around TCP/IP. Why should each agency maintain a specialized system for its own researchers when the NSFnet was open to everybody? Indeed, in one of the more poignant ironies of the story, the offspring quickly displaced its parent. Recognizing that the megabit speeds of the upgraded NSFnet had turned the 56-kilobit Arpanet into a dinosaur, ARPA officials started systematically decommissioning their venerable IMPs and transferring their users to the faster network. By 1990 the Arpanet was history.

The upshot, says Wolff, was that by the beginning of the 1990s the de facto national research network was in place, and TCP/IP ruled: the Internet had expanded from its original base in the Defense Department to the research community as a whole. But of course, the expansion hardly stopped there; Wolff was already taking steps to extend the Internet into the commercial arena as well.

“I pushed the Internet as hard as I did because I thought it was capable of becoming a vital part of the social fabric of the country—and the world,” he says. “But it was also clear to me that having the government provide the network indefinitely wasn’t going to fly. A network isn’t something you can just buy; it’s a long-term, continuing expense. And government doesn’t do that well. Government runs by fad and fashion. Sooner or later funding for NSFnet was going to dry up, just as funding for the Arpanet was drying up. So from the time I got here, I grappled with how to get the network out of the government and instead make it part of the telecommunications business.”

Unfortunately, Wolff says, the telecommunications companies themselves still had minimal interest in the Internet: from their point of view, every E-mail that got sent was a telephone call that didn’t get made. “As late as nineteen eighty-nine or ’ninety, I had people from AT&T come in to me and say—apologetically—‘Steve, we’ve done the business plan, and we just can’t see us making any money.’ ”

In retrospect, at least, Wolff’s solution to this conundrum had a subtlety that seems almost Machiavellian: in what would prove to be the second critical choice made in implementing the NSFnet, he decentralized its actual management.

“Starting with the inauguration of the NSFnet program in nineteen eighty-five,” he explains, “we had the hope that it would grow to include every college and university in the country. But the notion of trying to administer a threethousand-node network from Washington—well, there wasn’t that much hubris inside the Beltway. So we had to go to a hierarchical structure. We invited groups of universities, research laboratories, companies, and so forth to band together into consortia for regional networks.”

The basic idea was to create a three-tiered structure similar to that of the telephone system. At the lowest level would be individual campus-scale networks operated by research laboratories, colleges, and universities, analogous to private branch telephone exchanges run by individual firms. At the middle level would be the new regional networks connecting the local networks, analogous to the telephone systems’ regional “Baby Bells.” And at the highest level would be a high-capacity nationwide “backbone” operated directly by the NSF, analogous to the long-distance telephone lines.

Now, this scheme didn’t get fully implemented until they were planning the 1988 upgrade, says Wolff. But in due course, with NSF’s providing the seed money, the regional networks took shape, all operating as not-for-profit Internet access providers to the research community. However, he says, “we told them, ‘You guys will eventually have to go out and find other customers. We don’t have enough money to support the regionals forever.’ So they did—commercial customers. We tried to implement an NSF Acceptable Use Policy to ensure that the regionals kept their books straight and to make sure that the taxpayers weren’t directly subsidizing commercial activities. But out of necessity, we forced the regionals to become general-purpose network providers.” Or as they would soon be called, Internet Service Providers.

Vint Cerf, for one, is still lost in admiration for this little gambit. “Brilliant,” he calls it. “The creation of those regional nets and the requirement that they become self-funding was the key to the evolution of the current Internet.”

Certainly the gambit was effective. While it’s true that many of the regionals themselves faltered rather badly in the marketplace, some of them did quite well. New York’s NYSERnet, for example, spun off its operational activities into a very successful commercial subsidiary, Performance Systems International (PSInet) in Reston, Virginia. And in any case, there were any number of independent access providers springing up as well. “So by nineteen-ninety,” says Wolff, “we had all these young but extremely vigorous commercial operators who had no commitment to academia. They would just sell Internet access to business, industry, individuals, whoever would buy it.”

Indeed, this new wave of sellers and buyers soon became something of a self-exciting system. On the supply side, there were national carriers offering business class service in the major cities, small-town PC retailers offering dial-in access to local customers as a sideline, and everything in between: entry into the market was comparatively cheap and easy by the early 1990s, if only because all the necessary Internet hardware was now available off the shelf. Routers, connectors, cables, modems-—entrepreneurial firms such as Cisco Systems had been churning them out ever since the Defense Department first embraced TCP/IP, in the early 1980s. And then with the coming of the NSFnet in 1986, their market had been virtually guaranteed. The first Interop trade show attracted five thousand engineers, who browsed through exhibits from fifty companies—and that was in September 1988, when there were “only” some sixty thousand host computers on the Internet. By 1991, when the NSF did its second backbone upgrade, the Internet was connecting ten times that many host computers, and the provider business was booming.

It was also becoming obstreperous. During the NSFnet upgrade of 1991, most notably, a group of commercial access providers led by PSI alleged that the upgrade was being managed in a manner that was anticompetitive. The networking industry had matured to the point where NSF (or the regional networks) could simply buy long-distance backbone services on the open market. And yet, they said, Wolff and company had arbitrarily awarded the backbone contract to a single vendor known as ANS~—a consortium of IBM, MCI, and Merit, a Michigan firm that had run the earlier backbone. “They called it a partnership,” fumed PSI president William Schrader. “I called it a conspiracy.”

Back at headquarters, Wolff enjoyed this about as much as any parent enjoys listening to a rebellious teenager. Nonetheless, he insists that he was delighted with the outcome: after some scathing congressional hearings and a two-year investigation by the NSF Inspector General (which found no wrongdoing), his office was “forced” to do what he’d always been aiming toward anyway, which was to push the Internet into the private sector. In 1992 Congress passed a bill that formally allowed for-profit access providers to use the NSFnet backbone. And on April 30, 1995, the NSFnet ceased to exist: Wolff’s office would henceforth take the backbone’s $12 million annual operating cost and start distributing it to the regional networks to buy long-distance service on the open market from vendors such as MCI. (That funding, in turn, would decline to zero over the next four years.) The foundation would continue to operate a much smaller, veryhigh-speed system connecting its supercomputer centers at 155 megabits per second. But beyond that, the Internet was at last on its own, and self-sustaining.

On the demand side, meanwhile, all these new, nonacademic customers were discovering that entry into the Internet was considerably less intimidating than it had once been. Thanks to the Usenet newsgroups, for example, as well as the ListServ mailing lists that had originated on Bitnet, the sense of community was stronger than ever: you could always find someone on the Internet who shared your interests. Then, too, E-mail had been standardized and greatly streamlined, first in January 1983, when ARPA adopted the simple mail-transfer protocol (SMTP), and then in January 1986, when a summit of network representatives sorted out the ad hoc chaos of Internet addressing. (They had to do something, said one participant: every host computer on the Internet needed a name, and everybody wanted to claim “Frodo.”) The solution was DNS, the now-famous domain-name system that assigns each host computer a sequence of names separated by periods, as in Ics.mit.edu.

New users could likewise find a variety of new tools for navigating the ’Net. In 1990, for instance, programmers at the University of Minnesota created a popular utility known as Gopher, which allowed a user to search for information on the Internet via a series of hierarchical menus. Shortly thereafter, another group at Thinking Machines, Inc., came up with WAIS, the Wide Area Information Service, which enabled users to search for Internet files based on their content. And then around Christmastime 1990, at CERN, the European Center for Particle Physics in Geneva, Switzerland, an English physicist named Tim Berners-Lee finished the initial coding of a system in which Internet files could be linked via hypertext.

Actually, Berners-Lee had already been playing with the idea of hypertext for a full decade by that point, having independently reinvented the idea long before he ever heard of Vannevar Bush, Doug Engelbart, Ted Nelson, or, for that matter, the Internet itself; his first implementation, in 1980, had been a kind of free-form database that simply linked files within a single computer. But having a program follow hyperlinks across the network was an obvious extension of the idea, especially after CERN joined the Internet in the late 1980s. Thus the 1990 implementation, which also included Berners-Lee’s notion of “browsing”: the program had a word-processor-like interface that displayed the links in a file as underlined text; the user would just click on a link with the mouse, and the program would automatically make the leap, display whatever files or pictures it found at the other end, and then be ready to leap again.

In retrospect, of course, Berners-Lee’s combination of hypertext and browsing would prove to be one of those brilliantly simple ideas that change everything. By giving users something to see, it set off a subtle but powerful shift in the psychology of the Internet. No longer would it be just an abstract communication channel, like the telephone or the TV; instead, it would become a place, an almost tangible reality that you could enter into, explore, and even share with the other people you found there. It would become the agora, the electronic commons, the information infrastructure, cyberspace. Because of Berners Lee’s hypertext browsing, users would finally begin to get it about the Internet. And they would want more....

But then, that was still in the future. During the Christmas season of 1990, Berners-Lee was concerned mainly with getting the program finished, not to mention the impending birth of his first child. He was also acutely aware that this initial version of the program would run only on a NeXT computer-—his personal favorite, but certainly not a brand that was in widespread use. It would be the better part of a year before others began to use his system in significant numbers, and even longer before browsers became available for Unix machines, PCs, and Macs.* But at least he had found a decent name for the thing—a process that had proved to be surprisingly tricky. What he wanted was something that conveyed his intent to create a new kind of global data structure. But Mesh, or Information Mesh, sounded too much like “mess.” Mine Of Information had the unfortunate acronym MOI, French for “me,” which he felt was too egocentric. And The Information Mine turned into TIM, which was even worse.

So in the end Berners-Lee settled for a name that was still less than ideal, since its acronym was nine syllables long when spoken. Nonetheless, it did seem to say what he wanted it to say, so he went with it: World Wide Web. LUCK “I think he knew something was going wrong with him all that day,” says Louise Licklider, thinking back to the beginning of June 1990.

“We were driving back from a vacation trip through the Midwest,” she explains. “He loved to drive. But we both knew that this would be our last vacation. Robin [still her pet name for her husband] had asthma, which was rapidly getting worse. He had Parkinson’s that was rapidly getting worse. And now he had prostate cancer that had metastasized. So on the trip coming back, I had been steeling myself for rapid changes in our life-styles.”

On the last leg toward home, Lick seemed to be in a nostalgic, sentimental mood, as if he were very far away. “It was unusual for him to be that far back in * Writing a new browser wasn’t especially hard, once you knew how. And by 1992 or so, as the Web became more popular, computer-science grad students all over the world were doing it as a way of exercising their programming skills. Take Marc Andreessen, for example, a grad student at the University of Illinois’s National Center for Supercomputing Applications, one of the NSF’s supercomputer centers. Along with staff member Eric Bina, he created a browser for X-Windows, the Unix graphical interface. Mosaic, as they called it, wasn’t really any better than anybody else’s browser, at least at first. But Andreessen, far more than any other of his contemporaries, listened to the users. Fueled by espresso, he haunted the Internet newsgroups incessantly, trying to figure out what people wanted in a browser and then incorporating new features practically overnight. When Mosaic was finally made available to the public, in January 1993—free for the downloading, in fact, since NCSA was a government-funded operation and not allowed to charge a fee—its combination of high quality and zero cost quickly made it the browser of choice. In December 1993, Andreessen left NCSA and formed a partnership with Silicon Graphics founder Jim Clark; their company soon became known as Netscape Communications Corporation. the past,” she says. “It was different enough that it caught my attention. Then when we got to the end of the Massachusetts Turnpike, there was an inn out in the countryside where we often liked to stop. So he said, “Let’s go in for a martini.’ We did, and we sat there on the porch for a while. Finally, he said, ‘What do you say we just sit here all afternoon?’ It was a beautiful day, and he didn’t want to leave. But I said, ‘Oh, come on, Robin! You need to get home and rest.’ So we went home. And all the way in, he hummed and sang all the old love songs that were popular back when we were dating. So looking back on it later, I had to feel that he had some premonition that something was going on in his body.

“When we got home,” Louise continues, “he went upstairs. I was picking up the mail when suddenly he called down to me very urgently, ‘Louise, bring me a pen!’ ”

Louise?

“I knew something was wrong because he never called me Louise—always Sugar, or Shuggie. So I grabbed a pen out of the kitchen—one of those silly little things you keep with a notepad—and ran upstairs.”

Linda Licklider Smith, who lived with her own family just a block away, can vividly remember being awakened by her mother’s frantic phone call, throwing on some clothes, and then running down the dark street to her parents’ house. “The night was beautiful, and the silence of the street was deafening,” she says. “TI immediately went upstairs to my parents’ bedroom and found my father collapsed on the floor. I tried to find a pulse, but I could not.”

The ambulance crew were able to keep Lick alive using CPR until they could get him to Symmes Hospital in Arlington, where the emergency-room doctors got his heart beating again. But his wife and daughter both knew that too many minutes had passed in the interim. “He’s brain-dead, isn’t he?” Louise asked the doctors. And they said, “Yes.”

Louise looked at the forest of tubes and pumps forcing oxygen into and out of her husband’s lungs, the IV bags dripping nutrients into his bloodstream, the electrodes and wires monitoring his heart.

“Take all that stuff off!” she demanded. She tried somehow to make them understand that this was a man who lived by his brains, whose greatest joy was the playful workings of his imagination, who...

And as gently as possible, the doctors explained that they couldn’t remove Lick’s life support, that the tiny bit of neural activity remaining in the brain stem kept him from meeting the strict definition of brain death prescribed by Massachusetts law. There was no hope whatsoever that he would regain consciousness or have any further meaningful existence, but unless and until he started breathing on his own, they were legally obligated to let the respirator keep on doing it for him.

“It was the law,” says Louise, remembering her continued, fruitless demands. “They had to keep it on. Eventually they took him into the intensive-care unit.”

Both Tracy and Linda returned with their mother the next morning. “Robin was still on all the gear,” says Louise. “They had assigned a young doctor from MIT to the case. The kids accosted him with pictures and newspaper clippings about their father. They started talking about him and told the doctor, “This is a man who would have jumped out a window if he’d known what you were doing. How can we get this stuff off of him?’ ”

The doctor understood and was as sympathetic as anyone could be. “But the law says we can’t remove the life support until he starts breathing on his own,” he told them. “Then we can get him off within the minute.”

And there things stood, says Louise. “Then, about the third day, I went to the ICU, and Robin was gone. I was frantic; I just assumed that he had died. But they said no, they had taken him to room such and such.” Miraculously, Lick had indeed started breathing on his own, which meant that the hospital staff could begin to take him off life support. “But Robin’s heart just kept on beating,” she says. “They had given me permission to stay in the room overnight, so I stayed there night and day. Sometimes I’d go downstairs to take care of the grandchildren while Tracy and Linda went up to see him. But that was all.

“After several weeks,” she goes on, “I was just pulling up a chair for a night’s sleep, when Robin’s knee came up and went back down. In all that time he hadn’t moved a finger. But I knew there is usually a death spasm. So I told the nurse, ‘I think he yust died.’ And he had.”

The date was Tuesday, June 26, 1990. The doctors never knew exactly why Lick had collapsed and stopped breathing, according to Louise. “Since he called for a pen, they thought it might have been a choking reflex from an asthma attack,” she says. “But it seemed senseless to do an autopsy. Besides, Robin had donated his corneas and anything else that was harvestable for transplant, and to use those organs they have to take them within just a few hours after death.”

Anyway, she says, “the next morning when the kids and I went in to get his things, the young doctor who had been so good to us came up and said how glad he was for us that it was over. And you know, I was devastated when Robin died. It was a horrid loss. But nevertheless I did feel thankful. I thought about how Robin had always felt so lucky in his life: every time he was feeling bored, something new would come up, and off he would go. He loved new experiences: travel, driving, eating in new restaurants—even if the place was bad, at least it was different. But his health was rapidly disintegrating at the end. He would have been miserable in another year, when he couldn’t learn, couldn’t experiment, couldn’t teach. And then I was so thankful that Robin had gone quickly that way—because he was indisputably brain-dead from the time he finished calling me. He went out with dignity, still doing what he loved to do.

“So once I could accept the fact that he was gone,” she says, “I thought to myself, Well, Robin, you lucked out again.” Certainly he had been a profoundly lucky man in one respect: far more than most of us, J. C. R. Licklider lived to see his dreams become reality. By June 26, 1990, the visions that he had begun to articulate more than thirty years before— Man-Computer Symbiosis, the Intergalactic Network, the global commons of the Multinet—were already taking on concrete form as personal computers, graphical user interfaces, local-area networks, the Internet, and much, much more. Lick’s conception of the future would practically define the high-tech 1990s and would seem to grow only more prescient at the dawn of the new millennium.

And yet it’s fair to ask, did Lick himself really have all that much to do with these developments? If he had never spun his dreams of symbiosis and all the rest, or if he hadn’t accepted Jack Ruina’s offer to start ARPA’s command-andcontrol program, wouldn’t the history of computing still have unfolded pretty much the way it did?

Maybe. On the one hand, as Lick himself pointed out in his 1988 interview with the Charles Babbage Institute, the pieces were already in place in 1962. Time-sharing experiments were already under way at MIT, BBN, Dartmouth, and elsewhere. DEC was already doing its best to spread the gospel of interactive computing in the commercial arena; its breakthrough success with minicomputers was only a few years away. Enrollment in computer-science courses was already burgeoning, thanks to the explosive growth of IBM and the Seven Dwarfs. And companies such as Texas Instruments and Fairchild were already pushing hard on integrated-circuit technology. There is every reason to believe that the Santa Clara Valley would have become Silicon Valley right on schedule; that computer-on-a-chip microprocessors would have emerged just as they did in the 1970s; and that hobbyists would have started building home computers in their garages soon thereafter. So it’s easy to imagine scenarios in which the history of computers would have played out pretty much as it actually did, even without Lick or ARPA.

On the other hand, it’s even easier to imagine scenarios in which that history might have played out very differently indeed—scenarios in which those hobbyist computers would stay in their garages for a very long time, for example, while microchips mainly went into building bigger and more powerful centralized machines. Technology isn’t destiny, no matter how inexorable its evolution may seem; the way its capabilities are used is as much a matter of cultural choice and historical accident as politics is, or fashion. And in the early 1960s history still seemed to be on the side of batch processing, centralization, and regimentation. In the commercial world, for example, DEC was still a tiny niche player, a minor exception that proved the rule. Almost every other company in the computer industry was following Big Blue’s lead—and IBM had just made an unshakable commitment to batch processing and mainframes, a.k.a. System/360. In the telecommunications world, meanwhile, AT&T was equally committed to telephone-style circuit switching; its engineers would scoff at the idea of packet switching when Paul Baran suggested it a few years later, and they would keep on scoffing well into the 1980s. And in the academic world, no other agency was pushing computer research in the directions Lick would, or funding it at anything like the ARPA levels. Remember, says Fernando Corbato, “this was at a time when the National Science Foundation was handing out money with eyedroppers—and then only after excruciating peer review. Compared to that, Lick had a Jot of money. Furthermore, he was initially giving umbrella grants, which allowed us to fund the whole program. So there was this tremendous pump priming, which freed us from having to think small. The contrast was so dramatic that most places gravitated to ARPA. So that opening allowed a huge amount of research to get done.” Without that pump priming—or more precisely, without an ARPA animated by J.C. R. Licklider’s vision—there would have been no ARPA community, no Arpanet, no TCP/IP, and no Internet. There would have been no Project MAC-style experiments in time-sharing, and no computer-utilities boom to inflame the imagination of hobbyists with wild speculations about “home information centers.” There would have been no life giving river of cash flowing into DEC from the PDP-10 time-sharing machines it sold to the ARPA community. There would have been no windows-icons-mouse interface a la Doug Engelbart. And there would have been no creative explosion at Xerox PARC.

So in the end, about all anyone can really say is that it’s hard to play “What if?” with history. What we do know is that in owr history, J. C. R. Licklider had the vision. He was given the opportunity to realize that vision. He seized that opportunity. And he succeeded beyond anything he could have hoped for. Indeed, nothing testifies more eloquently to his success than one simple fact: in the late 1960s and early 1970s, at the height of the Vietnam debacle, when governments and institutions of all kinds were viewed as hated instruments of oppression, and when punch card-belching mainframes were seen as the most potent symbol of tyranny, a rising generation of computer-science students began to think of computers as berating. This was the generation that would build the Arpanet. This was the generation that would gather at PARC. And this was the generation—together with the students zt would teach—that would engineer the personal-computer revolution of the 1980s and the networking revolution of the 1990s. Even now, people who never heard of “Man-Computer Symbiosis” or J. C. R. Licklider still fervently believe in his dream, because it is in the very air they breathe.

“I think Lick’s being at that place at that time is a testament to the tenuousness of it all,” says Bob Taylor. “It was really a fortunate circumstance. You could never get him to admit that, because he was modest to a fault. But he was a very knowledgeable person about scientific endeavor in general, and about the philosophy of science. He was a very good judge of people. And I don’t think that Ivan, or I, or anyone who’s been in that ARPA position since, has had the vision that Lick had. Most of the significant advances in computer technology—including the work that my group did at Xerox PARC-—were simply extrapolations of Lick’s vision. They were not really new visions of their own. So he was really the father of it all.” Al Vezza was insistent, remembers Louise Licklider. “Lick had said that he didn’t want any kind of to-do when he died,” she says. “He wasn’t religious himself, even though his father had been a Southern Baptist minister, so it would seem totally phony if he’d had a big religious service.” But Vezza kept reminding her of the retirement party. It had been one of the best, he said: just look at all the people who’d shown up, all the stories that had gotten told. This memorial service wouldn’t be for Lick, he said. It would be for all the people who had known him.

So she relented. And the result was . . . zmteresting. “All the ushers were undergraduates from the lixkids group,” she explains. “There were wonderful speakers, almost all of them with wonderful stories. Tracy gave a delightful discussion of growing up as J.C. R. Licklider’s son. I later heard from a lot of people—even some of the more hard-nosed theatrical people from my theater group—who said that they had never felt so much love in a room at any service in their memory. Everyone who spoke genuinely loved the man. But it wasn’t sentimental. It was just very, very warm. And very different. I think several people were a little stunned by it.”

With reason. The tradition at memorial services was for the MIT string quartet to play a dignified selection of Bach and Brahms. But when Vezza had asked Louise what kind of music her husband had liked, she said Dixieland. And Broadway show tunes. So he got a band to play Lick’s favorite songs—“Impossible Dream,” “Sunrise, Sunset,” and so on—in Dixieland style. “It sort of shook people up the first time they heard it,” remembers Vezza. “But then they realized, that was Lick.” Much later, says Louise Licklider, when she decided to move out of the house in suburban Arlington, Massachusetts, where they’d lived for the past twenty-five years, she had to confront the space in the basement where her husband had stored his “papers.”

“The MIT Archives had been desperate for his papers,” she says. “They kept saying, “We'll send someone to take it all out.’ And I kept saying, “That just isn’t possible.’ They thought I was simply being emotional and difficult. But I wasn’t. Robin was a very specific, accurate man. But he was not a filer. He had a natural inclination to save everything, even erasers that had worn down. So he had all these personal things in the middle that I wasn’t about to sort out.

“Well, Archives got very irritated and finally quit bugging me. But when I moved, a young man named Keith, who loved and adored Lick, came and stood beside me as we went through the basement, just shaking his head. You’d pick up a paper, and it would be a test from a course he taught twenty years ago. Under that would be a flier advertising a lecture. There would be maps of towns he’d been in that had no historical significance, because he liked old maps. I’d throw a few things into a box for MIT, but most of it we threw out.

“Well,” she says, “at one point I heard Keith just burst out laughing. Anything Lick loved, he Joved—chocolate, for one thing. And Keith had come across a folder full of chocolate-bar wrappers that Lick had collected, all neatly folded. Beautiful wrappers from all over the world .. .”
